The Maria Regina Series — No. 5. 



MONEY MANIPULATION 

AND 

SOCIAL ORDER 



BY 
REV. DENIS FAHEY, C.S.Sp., D.D., D.Ph., B.A. 

Professor of Philosophy and Church History, 
Holy Ghost Missionary College, Kimmage, Dublin. 



" No servant can serve two masters .... You cannot serve God and 
mammon. Now the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things : 
and they derided Him" (St. Luke, xvj, 13, 14). 



BROWNE AND NOLAN LIMITED 
CORK DUBLIN BELFAST 



PRINTED IN IRELAN'G 




Bl 




UeS^L£n 



'& 



http: //www. liber ius .net 

© Bibliotheque Saint Libere 2008. 
F ree to reproduce for any non-profit purpose. 



MONEY MANIPULATION AND SOCIAL 
ORDER 



OTHER WORKS BY THE REV. DENIS FAHEY, C.S.Sp. 

The Mystical Body of Christ in the Modern World. 
Browne & Nolan, Ltd., Dublin. 

The Mystical Body of Christ and the Reorganization of Society. 
The Workingmeris Guilds of the Middle Ages. 
The Kingship of Christ and Organized Naturalistn. 
The Forum Press, Cork. 

The Rulers of Russia. 

Holy Ghost Missionary College, Kimmage, Dublin. 



Imprimi Potest : 

D. MURPHY, C.S.Sp., 

Prtep. Prov. Hib. 

Nihil Obstat : 

P. SEXTON, D.D., 

Cemor Deputatus. 

Imprimatur : 

t% DANIEL, 

Episcopus Corcagiemis. 

Corcagiee, die n B Mali, 1944 



First printed, 1944. 



Printed in Ireland at Parkgate Printing 
Works, Dublin, bv Cahill & Co., Ltd, 



DEDICATION 

To the Immaculate Queen of Heaven and Earth, to St. Joseph, 
the Head of the Holy Family and the Protector of the Universal 
Church,, to St. Thomas Aquinas, the Catholic Church's Official 
Teacher of order, and to St. Brigid of Ireland, who was so well 
versed in the arts of rural life, this book is lovingly and humbly 
dedicated by the author, in the hope that by their intercession it 
may contribute in some little way to the return of the world to 
the full acceptance of the rule of Christ the King, so that social 
environment may once more sustain men in their efforts to live 
as members of His Mystical Body. 

" / have alluded to the appalling progress of desert-making on 
behalf of greed throughout the world. Erosion is a symptom of 
sickness in any civilization. To-day, as modern civilization is a 
world complex, it bids fair to engulf mankind. Already the 
spectre of world famine casts its shadow ahead. Even in forestry 
there is more need to plant trees to preserve life than there is to 
exploit forests for felling. The financial rulers have the greatest 
responsibility for all this, since the system they administer has 
faithfully impletnented human greed and ignorance. Financial 
greed has not only led the van, but directed the attack ; and, 
having lent at interest sufficient money to exploit the soil, it has 
thereafter diverted the springs of credit that might have repaired 
the damage due to soil exploitation to the profitable business of 
transport, public utilities and luxury trades. The result is that 
it is as devastating to human material as it has been upon the 
soil. . . . Most of this degeneration can be laid finally at the 
door of finance, just as to the same door we can lay the twenty 
to thirty million unemployed who haunted the streets of Europe 
and America " (Alternative to Death, by the Earl of Portsmouth, 
pp. 40, 37), 



FOREWORD 

The author begs to thank the Editor of The Standard 
(Dublin) for kindly permitting him to reprint the large portion 
of Appendix II which appeared in that paper and also for the 
permission, generously accorded, to make use of the other 
passages quoted from that paper. He begs to thank the 
Editor of The Weekly Review (London) for kindly acceding to 
a similar request and also the many Publishers, whose works 
are quoted. He hopes to interest his readers in some of the 
valuable works that have appeared in recent years on this 
important subject. 

To those who are beginning the study of money, the 
author recommends Promise to Pay, by R. McNair Wilson 
(George Routledge and Sons), The Root of all Evil, by 
Sir Reginald Rowe (Economic Reform Club), and The 
Modern Idolatry, by Jeffrey Mark (Chatto and Windus). 
These can be followed by Professor O'Rahilly's Money 
(Cork University Press) and The Role of Money, by Professor 
Soddy (George Routledge and Sons). To those who deplore 
the decay of the country-side he specially recommends 
Alternative to Death, by the Earl of Portsmouth (Faber and 
Faber), Look to the Land, by Lord Northbourne (J. M. 
Dent and Sons), and An Agricultural Testament, by Sir 
Albert Howard (Oxford University Press). 

By an oversight it has not been mentioned in the text 
that An Outline of Money, by Geoffrey Crowther, is pub- 
lished by Thomas Nelson and Sons, Ltd., and that Professor 
Skinner alias Montagu Norman, by John Hargrave, is 
published by Wells Gardner, Darton and Co., Ltd. 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Dedication v 

Table of Contents. ... ■ vii 

CHAPTER f 
Demand for Monetary Reform in England i 

CHAPTER II 

olitical, Economic and Financial Principles of St. 
Thomas Aquinas . . . . • 7 

CHAPTER III 

The Functioning of the Gold Standard Monetary 
System : 
Money-Manipulators and Governments — Defective 
Principles adopted by the Bank of England with 
regard to the Issue of Money — The Bankers' Discovery 1 1 

CHAPTER IV 

National Finance and the Gold Standard : 

The Meaning of Inflation and Deflation — Some Historical 
Examples of Planned Deflations 20 

CHAPTER V 
nternational Trade and the Gold Standard : 

The Urge to War and Destruction 31 

CHAPTER VI 

The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human 
Life : 

Farming — Bread . . . . 40 

Vll 



viii Table of Contents 

CHAPTER VII 

Usury : 

The English Monetary System and Ireland . . . . 52 

CHAPTER VIII 

Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform : 
National Monetary Reform : 

(a) Abandonment of the Domestic Gold Standard. 

(b) Issuing of Lawful Exchange-Medium by the 

State. 

(c) Lending of Lawful Exchange-Medium by 

Banking Guild. 

(d) Stability of Price Level 60 

CHAPTER IX 
The Full Return to Order 76 

APPENDIX I 
Money— Bank— Deposit 85 

APPENDIX U 

Gardens, Fertilizers and Finance : 

Inorganic Fertilizers — Artificial Manures and Finance 
— The Ideas Underlying the Bio-dynamic Method of 
Composting . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 

APPENDIX III 
Destruction of Quinine to keep up Price . . . . 96 

APPENDIX IV 
Outline of English History 98 

Index of Proper Names 101 



CHAPTER I 

DEMAND FOR MONETARY REFORM IN ENGLAND 

The following letter was addressed in 1943 to His Excellency, 
Most Reverend William Godfrey, the Apostolic Delegate 
to Great Britain, to the Anglican Archbishops of Canterbury, 
York and Wales, and to other Ecclesiastical Dignitaries 
in Great Britain. It was accompanied by a proposal to 
form an association having for object an honest National 
Money System for England. The letter runs as follows : 

Your Grace, 

(1) We, all of British blood and descent, having studied the 
fundamental causes of the present world unrest, have long 
been forced to the conclusion that an essential first step towards 
the return of human happiness and brotherhood with economic 
security and liberty of life and conscience, such as will permit 
the Christian ethic to flourish again, is the immediate resump- 
tion by the community in each nation of its prerogative over 
the issue of money including its modern credit substitutes. 

(2) This prerogative has been usurped by those still termed 
in general " bankers," both national and international, who 
have perfected a technique to enable themselves to create the 
money they lend by the granting of bookkeeping credits, and 
to destroy it by the withdrawal of the latter at their discretion , 
in accordance with entirely mistaken and obsolete ideas which 
they do not defend against impartial and informed scientific 
criticism and examination. In this way a form of national 
money debt has been invented, in which the lender surrenders 
nothing at all ; and which it is physically an impossibility for 
the community ever to pay. Any attempt to do so produces 
the artificial " economic blizzard," as it did after the 1914-18 
war. 

(3) This has led to the gradual rise of a form of national, 
international and supra-national power, dominating through 
its monopolisation of the National social credit all the basic 



2 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

creative activities of mankind. Thus, in this as in other 
countries, it has become impossible to obtain publication in 
the Press, or to broadcast on the radio, the truth concerning 
this economic enslavement which holds the peoples of the 
world in thrall. 

(4) Under the world's present financial system the money, 
except for a now trifling proportion, is originally created by 
the issue of a loan' at interest by the " bankers," who lend 
nothing themselves but in effect make a forced levy in kind 
on the Nation by conferring on the borrower the power to 
purchase a corresponding amount of wealth on the market, 
which wealth does not belong to them, or those who borrow 
from them, but to the community. The proceeds of the issue 
of new money — whether of paper or any other form of credit 
money — belong to the Nation in which it is, or is accepted 
as, legal tender, and not to the issuer. Herein lies the basic 
flaw of the existing monetary system. 

(5) By this method, which has come to be regarded as legal 
by virtue of established practice, the banks in our country are 
responsible for the issue of new money of their own creation 
amounting to-day to between two and three thousand million 
pounds — this being the difference between loans extended, 
including those to themselves, and those repaid since they 
instituted the system a number of years ago — and are thereby 
extracting by means of interest an annual tribute from the 
Nation of over £100,000,000 for what has now become to 
them a relatively costless and riskless service. But the real 
danger, well understood in every preceding era of history, is 
the undermining of all lawfully constituted authority by the 
creation and destruction of money carried on in secret for 
private gain and the acquisition of power. 

(6) All forms of government, whether conservative, liberal 
or labour, fascist, socialist or communist, fall alike under the 
control of a political Power Group, which is ultimately, and 
in large measure unwittingly, dominated by the Money 
Creators and Manipulators. In this way the national political 
power, which, if the individual is to enjoy the maximum of 
personal freedom consistent with his duty to his conscience 
and his fellows, should be distributed throughout the people, 
has been usurped without their knowledge or consent. 

(7) It will be seen that the present monetary system, which 
by its disregard of primary physical and ethical laws is inevit- 
ably destroying the civilisation into which it has been 
introduced, requires rectification both in its material technique 



Demand for Monetary Reform in England 3 

and in the ethics which at present inspire and control this 
technique. It is particularly in view of its devastating effects 
in the moral sphere that we have ventured to refer to 
Ecclesiastical Authority, and to invoke the Churches to action. 

(8) We therefore appeal to you in your position of great 
authority and influence to proclaim the truth to the Nation 
on this subject and in the hope that you may see fit to 
disseminate as widely as possible the text of this statement, 
whereby this vitally important question may be brought to 
the light of day and earnestly enquired into by the peoples of 
the British Commonwealth. 

(9) We do so in all Christian fellow-feeling, knowing and 
honouring the efforts you are making against the abuses of 
our present economic system and the evils of usury, and 
believing that the world is now in the gravest crisis of its 
history. The issue of new money by the money-lender is an 
unforeseen result of the modern cheque as a substitute for 
national money — a valuable invention which in itself was 
undoubtedly social and benevolent in intention and effect. If 
the cheque system were corrected, as it can be simply 
corrected, to restore to the nations their rightful prerogative 
over the issue of money, there is every reason to retain it. 
We fully appreciate the services which banking organisations 
have rendered and can continue to render to the community. 
But the issue and destruction of money by the money-lender 
is not a service, but a weapon which can be and has been used 
to perpetuate poverty amidst abundance, which renders 
individuals and nations powerless to protect themselves, and 
which may even be perverted to serve vast designs for the 
complete subjugation of the human race to tyranny, exploitation 
and the powers of darkness and evil. 

NORMAN A. THOMPSON 

(A.M.I.E.E., Research Engineer, Inventor of the Norman 
Thompson Flying Boat, 1914, and other developments in 
aviation and in mechanical propulsion ; Originator of this 
Appeal) 

FREDERICK SODDY 

(M.A., LL.D., F.R.S., Nobel Laureate in Chemistry, 1921 ; 
pioneer in the Economics of Wealth, author of Wealth, Virtual 
Wealth and Debt (1926), Money versus Man (1931), Role of 
Money (1934), etc.) 

THE REV. P. T. R. KIRK 

(Vicar of Christ Church, Westminster) 



4 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

MAURICE RECKITT 

(M.A., Editor of Christendom, a Journal of Christian Sociology ; 
author of Faith and Society, 1932) 

the rev. p. Mclaughlin 

(Warden of St. Anne's House, Soho, London, W. 1) 

J. CREAGH SCOTT 

(D.S.O., O.B.E., Lt. Colonel ; Chairman, The Farmers' Action 
Council ; Advisory Chairman, The Service for Economic 
Action) 

REGINALD ROWE 

(Kt., President, Economic Reform Club and Institute, and of 
Nat. Fed. of Housing Societies ; a Governor of the Old Vic. 
and Sadler's Wells ; author of The Root of All Evil) 

JOHN HARGRAVE 

(F.R.S.A. ; inventor of the Hargrave Automatic Navigator for 
Aircraft (1937) ; Econ. Adviser to the Planning Comm. H.M. 
Govt, of Alberta (1936-7) ; Founder and Leader of the Social 
Credit Party of G.B. ; author of Summer Time Ends, etc.) 

ROBERT J. SCRUTTON 

(Founder-President pf the People's Common Law Parliament ; 
Monetary and Constitutional Reformer to establish a Christian 
Social Order. Books : A People's Runnymede, Let the People 
Rule, etc.) 

WILFRID HILL 

(Industrialist, Birmingham and London ; Pres., Comite 
International des ^changes, Paris ; Chairman, Econ. and 
Monetary Joint Council, London ; Anglo-American Committee 
World Trade Alliance) 

GLYN THOMAS 

(Manufacturer ; author of The Hour Sterling) 

CHARLES TURNER 

(Mech. and Mining Engineer ; Knowles Gold Medallist ; 
inventor of the Oil-from-Coal Process and Plant) 

CHRISTOPHER A BECKETT WILLIAMS 
(Political Journalist) 

ALLIOTT VERDON-ROE 

(Kt., O.B.E., F.RJLe.S., M.IAe.E. ; pioneer of Aviation and 
Money Reform. Books : Alberta is Fighting our War (1937) '■> 
A World of Wings and Things (1938) ; etc.) 



Demand for Monetary Reform in England 5 

L. B. POWELL 

(Editor of Cavalcade) 

R. R. STOKES 

(Member of Parliament for Ipswich) 

H. J. MASSINGHAM 

(Author of Wold Without End, The English Countryman, 
Remembrance, etc.) 

MRS. GLADYS BING 

(Speaker and writer on Social Credit. Author of The Fraud of 
Taxation) 

C. H. CLENDINING 

(Founder and Chairman of The Ex-Service Party ; North 
Atlantic Air Route Development ; Chairman, Irish Trans- 
Atlantic Corp., Ltd., 1932-8) 

I. V. ROBINSON 

(M.Inst.C.E., M.LMech.E., Whitworth Scholar, M.Amer. 
S.M.E., F.S.S. ; Hon. Treas. London Social Credit Club, etc.) 

A G. SEAMAN 

(M.I.E.E. ; inventor of Automatic Sorting of Heavy Goods) 

B. D. KNOWLES 

(Author of Britain's Problem) 

A. ROMNEY GREEN 

(F.R.Econ.S. ; Geometrician and Writer ; Promoter for a 
Scheme for Minimum Incomes without State Regimentation ; 
author of Rehabilitation of the Small Man, Christendom, 1943) 

C. MARSHALL HATTERSLEY 

(M.A., LL.B. ; Solicitor ; author of The Community^ Credit 
(1922) ; This Age of Plenty (1929) ; Wealth, Want and War 
(1937), and other works on Social Economics) 

HENRY S. LAWRENCE 

(K.C.S.I. ; formerly Finance Minister of Council, Bombay 
Presidency, India ; Member of Roy. Comm. on Agriculture 
(1926-8) ; author of Freedom from Fear and Want, Empire 
Review, 1942) 

W. D. CLARKE 

(Farmer ; author of Why Prices of Agricultural Products 
Fluctuate, 1936) 



6 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

LADY CLARE ANNESLEY 

(Speaker on Social Reform and Monetary Reform) 

THE REV. J. CLIFFORD GILL 

(Morecambe, Lane. ; author of The Mastery of Money) 

W. J. BROWN 

(Member of Parliament for Rugby ; Parliamentary General 
Secretary of the Civil Service Clerical Assn.) 

THE REV. C. H. LAMBERT 

(Canon of Blackburn ; Warden of Whalley Abbey and Diocesan 
Director of Religious Education) 

ARTHUR COE 

(Gas Engineer ; author of a Plan for a Scientifically and 
Morally Sound Currency) 

ANDREW MacLAREN 

(Member of Parliament for Burslem) 

In a covering letter, signed by Mr. Norman A. Thompson 
and Professor Frederick Soddy, it was stated that " if the way 
is not already paved before the cessation of hostilities towards 
a saner economic system under which all members of the 
nation will receive a more equitable and humane treatment, 
the return of our countrymen serving in the forces, who are 
becoming increasingly aware of the injustices of the existing 
monetary system, is likely to be the prelude to uncompromising 
disturbances." 

As we in Ireland have been and are living under the same 
monetary system, some friends have done me the honour of 
inviting me to examine the reasons which have elicited this 
protest from so many distinguished English men and women. 

Now, in the Encyclical Letter, Studiorwn Ducem, on St. 
Thomas Aquinas as Guide of Studies, Pope Pius XI points 
out that St. Thomas's philosophy and theology are so perfect 
that " he is our source for economic and political science." 
Accordingly, I shall begin by a brief exposition of the political, 
economic and financial principles of St. Thomas Aquinas. 



CHAPTER II 

POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL 
PRINCIPLES OF ST. THOMAS AQUINAS 

St. Thomas and Politics 

Politics is the science which has for object the organization 
of the State in view of the complete Common Good of the 
citizens in the natural order and the means that conduce to 
it. As the final end of man is, however, not merely natural, 
the State, charged with the temporal social order, must ever 
act in such wise as not only not to hinder but to favour the 
attaining of man's supreme end, the vision of God in Three 
Divine Persons. Political thought and political action, there- 
fore, in an ordered State, will respect the jurisdiction and 
guidance of the Catholic Church, the divinely-instituted 
Guardian of the moral order, remembering that what is 
morally wrong cannot be politically good. Thus the natural 
or temporal Common Good will be always aimed at by those 
in authority in the way best calculated to favour family life, 
in view of the development of true personality, in and through 
the Mystical Body of Christ. Political action and legislation, 
especially in economic matters, must ever seek to strengthen 
family life and, accordingly, must not only not admit divorce, 
but must always aim, as far as possible, at benefiting citizens 
through their families. 

St. Thomas and Economics 

Etymologically, economy is the government of the home 
and the family. Economics is the science which studies the 
component cells of the State, namely, families, in the consti- 
tuent relations of their members and in their conditions of 
existence. It aims at elucidating, primarily, the personal 
relations which constitute the family, the relations of husband 
and wife, parents and children, masters and servants, and then, 
secondarily, the relations that follow from the conditions of 
existence of the family, namely, the mutual relations of human 
persons anting from their need of external goods or real wealth. 

7 



8 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

On the one hand, our nature brings us into relation with 
earthly resources which, by taking account of their nature 
and laws, we have to transform into real wealth capable of 
satisfying our corporal needs. Such are the relations of men 
with minerals, stone, lime, copper, iron, petrol ; with the 
flora and fauna that people the earth, air and water ; with 
the nerves and muscles of our own bodies. On the other hand, 
from this necessary utilization of things follow personal social 
relations between us : relations between cultivators of the soil 
and artisans, between employers and employed, between indus- 
trialists and merchants, between buyers and sellers. All these 
relations, however, are between human persons whose well- 
being is bound up with strong family life. Needless to say, 
the organization of family life, in view of providing its members 
with sufficient material resources, is, though secondary, a very 
important element of economics. As St. Thomas points out, 
a sufficiency of material goods is necessary for the virtuous 
life of the average human being. 1 

Economics, then, will study : firstly, the constituent 
relations of the members of Christ, who compose the family ; 
secondly, the science of the production, distribution and 
exchange of natural wealth, in view of securing that sufficiency 
of material goods which is normally indispensable for the 
virtuous life of members of families ; . thirdly, the auxiliary 
art of the manipulation of money or artificial wealth, which 
is meant to facilitate families in procuring by exchange the 
above-mentioned sufficiency. 

THE RdLE OF MONEY 

According to right order, then, money or exchange-medium is 
for the production of material goods, and the production of 
material goods is for the virtuous life of members of Christ 
of which the foundation is laid in the Christian family. Money, 
according to St. Thomas, was invented by the art of man for 
the convenience of exchange by serving as a common measure 
of things saleable. " Natural wealth,*' he writes (la Ilae, 
Q.2, a.i, c), "is that by which natural wants are supplied, 
for example, food, drink, clothing, vehicles, dwellings and 
such like. Artificial wealth is that which is not a direct help 

1 " That a man may lead a virtuous life two things are required. The 
chief requisite is virtuous action, for virtue is that by which one leads a 
good life. The other requisite, which is secondary and quasi -instrumental 
in character, is a sufficiency of material goods, the use of which is necessary 
for virtuous action " {De Regimine Principum, Lib. I, Cap. XV). 



Political, Economic, Financial. Principles of St. Thomas Aquinas () 

to nature, as for instance, money. This was invented by the 
art of man, for the convenience of exchange by serving as a 
common measure of things saleable." As a common measure 
it ought to be stable. " As a measure used for estimating the 
value of things," writes St, Thomas (Comment, in Ethic, 
Lib. V, Led. IX), " money must keep the same value, since 
the value of all things must be expressed in terms of money. 
Thus exchanges can readily take place and, as a consequence, 
communications between men are facilitated." Money is, 
therefore, essentially an exchange-medium. Stability in value 
is a property or necessary attribute of an exchange-medium. 
Money is meant to facilitate families in procuring by exchange 
the sufficiency of material goods required for the virtuous 
life of the human personalities composing them. The virtuous 
life of human persons is simply their ordered development 
in Supernatural Life as members of Christ. 

Accordingly, as practical sciences or arts are arranged in 
hierarchical order according to the hierarchical order of their 
ends, the art of the manipulation of money must be at the 
service of Politics and Economics. Those who are skilled in 
the manipulation of money must be the servants of the State, 
not the dictators of governmental policy ; they must aim at 
aiding and strengthening family-life, not at disrupting it for 
the sake of the figures in their ledgers. It is completely against 
order if the production and the distribution of the goods 
needed by families must conform to the exigencies of money- 
making instead of the other way round. If, by a perversion 
of the right order, money or exchange-medium becomes the 
master, production and distribution will decay, the poten- 
tialities of the State's resources will not be realized, and 
family-life will suffer. If the manipulators of money get 
control of the Government of the State, then the Government 
will not be able to compel the bankers and the money-changers 
to practise the virtue of social justice, namely, that justice 
which has for object the Common Good, and the welfare 
of the whole nation will suffer grievously. Usury and alteration 
of the price-level will then be permitted to go unchecked, 
and the real Sovereignty in the State will inevitably pass 
into the hands of the manipulators of money. The next stage 
will be a move to bring national Sovereignty under the 
domination of some international organization subject to 
finance. That will make permanent and world-wide the 
present-day anti-Christian and anti-natural perversion of 
order involved in the subordination of human persons to the 

B 



io Money Manipulation and Social Order 

production of material goods and in the subordination of the 
production and distribution of material goods to finance. 

For St. Thomas, it is the duty of the State to see that money 
or exchange-medium is a stable measure of value. In other 
words, just as the State must maintain stable measures of 
weight and length, in view of commutative justice in buying 
and selling, so it must aim at stability of the price-level, the 
price of a thing being the expression of its exchange-value 
in terms of money. " It is true," writes St. Thomas {Comment, 
in Ethic., Lib. V, Led. IX), " that it is the same with money 
as with other things, namely that one does not always get 
what one wants for it, because it is not always endowed with 
the same purchasing-power, that is, it is not always of the same 
value. But, nevertheless, matters should be so arranged that 
it should be steadier in value than other things. . . As a measure 
used for estimating the value of other things, money must 
keep the same value, since the value of all things must be 
expressed in terms of money. Thus exchanges can readily 
take place and, as a consequence, communications between 
men are facilitated." 1 

1 For a fuller treatment of the principles of St. Thomas Aquinas concerning 
money, the reader is recommended to read The Mystical Body of Christ 
and the Reorganization of Society, Chapter III. 



CHAPTER III 

THE FUNCTIONING OF THE GOLD STANDARD 

MONETARY SYSTEM 

MONEY-MANIPULATORS AND GOVERNMENTS 

We have seen that for St. Thomas money is meant to be the 
servant of Politics and Economics. The art of manipulating 
money or exchange-medium must not be allowed to fall 
uncontrolled into the hands of private individuals, as they will 
be tempted to work for instability of price-levels in view of 
their own gain. A fortiori, the Rulers of the State must see 
to it that the manipulators of money do not get control of the 
Government. Now these two evils — instability of national 
price levels and control of Governments by financiers — seem 
to have been allowed to grow apace under the Gold Standard 
monetary system. We shall begin by some testimonies about 
the second point — the control of Governments by financiers. 

Let us take, first of all, a clear statement of principle by a 
well-known financier recently deceased, the Rt. Hon. Reginald 
McKenna, Chairman of the Midland Bank and former English 
Chancellor of the Exchequer. At the Midland Bank meeting 
of January, 1924, he said : "I am afraid that the ordinary 
citizen will not like to be told that the banks can, and do, 
create money. The amount of money in existence varies 
only with the action of the banks in increasing and decreasing 
deposits and bank purchases. Every loan, overdraft or bank 
purchase creates a deposit, and every repayment of a loan, 
overdraft or bank sale destroys a deposit. Arid they who control 
the credit of a nation, direct the policy of Governments and 
hold in the hollow of their hands the destiny of the people." 
In his 1927 speech, the same distinguished banker said that 
the total of available bank cash on which the quantity of loans 
or deposits of private banks depended was determined by the 
Bank of England. Thus we can conclude that, according to this 
former Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Governor of the 
Bank of England directs the policy of the English Government 
and practically holds in his hands the destiny of the English 
people. 



iz Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Let us now take the testimonies of the Rulers of States. 
When the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States, created 
in 1 91 3 by Mr. Paul Warburg, a German Jew belonging to the 
Banking Firm of Kuhn, Loeb and Company, had been a few 
years in existence, in 1916 to be precise, President Woodrow 
Wilson thus summed up the situation in U.S.A. : " A great 
industrial nation is controlled by its system of credit. Our 
system of credit is concentrated. The growth of the nation, 
therefore, and all our activities are in the hands of a few men. . . 
We have come to be one of the worst ruled, one of the most 
completely controlled and dominated Governments in the 
civilized world — no longer a Government by conviction and 
the free vote of the majority, but a Government by the opinion 
and duress of small groups of dominant men." From the 
similar testimonies quoted by Christopher Hollis in The Two 
Nations, let us take one. " Behind the ostensible government," 
ran Roosevelt's policy, " sits enthroned an invisible govern- 
ment owning no allegiance and acknowledging no responsibility 
to the people." 1 

If we pass to England, we shall find abundant evidence 
in proof of what Professor Soddy wrote about the Bank of 
England some years ago : " From being what is known as 
a bankers* bank, it has become now almost the Government's 
government." Mr. Gladstone said : " From the time I took 
office as Chancellor of the Exchequer (1852) I began to learn 
that the State held, in the face of the Bank and the City, an 
essentially false position as to finance. . . The hinge of the 
whole situation was this : the Government itself was not to be 
a substantive power in matters of finance, but was to leave 
the Money Power supreme and unquestioned. In the conditions 
of that situation I was reluctant to acquiesce, and I began to 
fight against it by financial self-assertion from the first . . . 
I was tenaciously opposed by the Governor and the Deputy- 
Governor of the Bank, who had seats in Parliament, and I had 
the City for an antagonist on almost every occasion." Mr. 
John Hargrave significantly adds in his book, Professor Skinner 
alias Montagu Norman : " It would astound the Grand Old 
Man to see the strides that the Money Power has made in 
building and entrenching its position since his day." 

Mr. Hargrave also quotes Mr. Vincent Vickers, Bank of 
England director 1910-1919, as follows : " It was not Mr. 
Winston Churchill, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, who 

x Op. cit., p. 319. The Two Nations is published by George Routledge 
and Sons, Ltd. 



The Functioning of the Gold Standard Monetary System 13 

initiated or was to blame for our return to the gold standard 
in 1925 ; it was not Mr. Baldwin who decided the terms 
of the Bank Notes and Currency Act . . . 1928 ; nor later was 
it Lord Snowden who personally pigeonholed that request 
for a Royal Commission on monetary policy and who sub- 
stituted so soon afterwards the McMillan Committee which 
seemed to some so redolent of Threadneedle Street. Since 
1919 the monetary policy of the Government has been the 
monetary policy of Mr. Montagu Norman." If we link with this 
the declaration already quoted from Mr. Reginald McKenna, 
distinguished banker and former Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
to the effect that " they who control the credit of a nation 
direct the policy of the Government," we have reliable testimony 
as to the real Ruler of England. In conclusion we may add 
to this that the Bank of England was empowered by the 
Income Tax Act of 19 18, Section 68, to assess and tax itself 
with nobody in control. The Bank of Ireland was accorded the 
same privilege by the same (British) Act of 191 8. 

In point of fact, with the growing influence of American 
financial interests, power over the British Government seems 
later to have passed to the other side of the Atlantic. Mr. 
Thomas Johnston, M.P., who in 193 1 was Lord Privy Seal 
in the Labour Government, wrote : " The City, the financiers 
and the money-lenders in New York and Paris, refused to put 
up credits in support of a balanced budget. They demanded a 
cut in unemployment benefit. They wanted humanity crucified 
on a cross of gold. We declined absolutely and resigned. . . 
Twenty men and one woman — a British Cabinet — waited 
one black Sunday afternoon in a Downing Street garden for 
a final decision from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York." 1 

The above will suffice to bring home to my readers the 
existence of a fundamental disorder in modern States, namely, 
the control of Governments by those skilled in the manipulation 
of money or exchange-medium. Finance is meant to be the 
servant of Politics and Economics. Instead it has come to be 
the master of both, so that human beings are sacrificed to the 

1 Tax-bonds or Bondage, by John Mitchell, p. 12. 

Christopher Hollis in The Two Nations (p. 241). says that the American 
financiers " made the reduction of the English dole a condition of their 
granting a loan of gold to the Bank of England. ... It is true that Mr. 
Ramsay MacDonald, as a general rule, pretended that it was not American 
dictation which was responsible for the reduction of the dole, but in a 
moment of forgetfulness he admitted that it was so in the House of Com- 
mons in answer to a question from Mr. Frank Owen." He quotes "the text 
of Hansard, vol. 256, col- 1273 (zist Sept., 1931). 



14 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

production of material goods and the production and 
distribution of material goods are sacrificed to finance. In the 
realm of production, as we shall see later, this disorder has 
led to the subordination of farming, by which the primary 
necessities of life are produced, to industry and the manufacture 
of secondary things. This reversal of order in regard to 
production is having disastrous consequences in soil-erosion, 
loss of fertility, and ill-health of human beings, animals and 
living things in general. 

Let us now turn to the evil of instability of price-levels. 
This will need longer elaboration. 

DEFECTIVE PRINCIPLES ADOPTED BY THE BANK OF ENGLAND 
WITH REGARD TO THE ISSUE OF MONEY 

Money, as we have seen, has been invented to serve as a 
stable measure of exchange in view of facilitating families in 
procuring the material goods necessary for the virtuous life 
of the persons composing them. Material goods are produced 
by the application of the available labour to the resources of the 
country. Money or exchange-medium is the indispensable 
means to enable this to be easily done in a complex society and 
thus permit the productivity of a country to be readily actualized. 
But the principle governing the injection of money into the 
country's industrial system must be the determination to 
actualize the country's potential resources in view of the 
Common Good. The endeavour must be to reach the point 
in which all the available labour and resources are being 
utilized in a manner respectful of the Catholic Church's 
programme of the widest possible diffusion of property. 
There has to be a planned gradual development, but the 
increasing capacity of a nation to make and supply goods 
ought never to be hampered by the lack of the means to carry 
on the indispensable exchanges. As money is, broadly speaking, 
a claim on the goods capable of being produced by the persons 
owning property in a community, its rate of issue must be 
regulated by the rate of actualization of these goods. The 
regulation of the issue of money on other principles will lead 
inevitably to a defective and lopsided development of a country's 
resources. 

in the history of the Bank of England, we find the issue 
of money regulated by two very defective principles. The 
first of these is more or less clearly embodied in the Tonnage 
Act or Bill of 1694, by which the Bank of England came into 



The Functioning of the Gold Standard Monetary System 15 

being almost by the back door. (The expression " almost by 
the back door " is that employed in the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica, 14th Ed., Vol. Ill, Art. Bank of England, p. 53). 
The preamble reads : "A Bill for granting to their Majesties 
several Rates and Duties upon tonnages of Ships, Vessels, 
and upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors : for securing certain 
Recompenses and Advantages, in the said Bill mentioned, 
to such persons as shall voluntarily advance the sum of Fifteen 
hundred thousand pounds towards carrying on the War 
against France." The chief of the " Recompenses and 
Advantages," which were granted to subscribers to the loan, 
who were to constitute a Corporation to be known as " The 
Governor and Company of the Bank of England," was that the 
Corporation was to have the right to issue notes up to the volume 
of its total capital. ** The Bank's Capital was £1,200,000," 
writes G. B. Knowles in Britain* s Problem, " the whole of 
which sum was to be advanced to the Government at a rate of 
8 per cent., plus £4,000 per annum for expenses, or £100,000 
per annum in all. The privileges of a bank were granted for 
twelve years to the Corporation, which was allowed to deal 
in bills of exchange or bullion, but not in merchandise, and. . . 
to manufacture and issue notes up to a volume equal to that 
of its capital. To use William Paterson's own words : * The 
Bank hath benefit of interest on all moneys which it creates 
out of nothing.' " When the Bank's Charter was renewed in 1709, 
the right was granted to double its capital and so its note issue. 
Thus the issue of new money depended, not upon the rate 
of actualization of the country's resources, but upon the 
amounts borrowed from time to time by the Government, 
and those borrowings were largely for foreign wars. This was 
the beginning of that phenomenon which has given rise to so 
much criticism since the Great War (1914-18). Money is 
forthcoming in abundance for war but not for the peaceful 
development of the country. " The first advance," writes 
Mr. Belloc in his Shorter History of England, " had been just 
over a million. In four years the National debt was twenty 
millions, and in twenty years it was already over fifty millions. 
It became a permanent institution. In this fashion Governments 
were enabled, for their purposes, to saddle posterity with the 
duty of financing their wars, whilst what was worse, wealthy 
men found the opportunity for levying a permanent tax on the 
community. If you had £10,000 to invest all you had to do was 
to buy Government stock, and you were certain of getting your 
interest for ever out of the taxpayers." 



1 6 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Another defective principle with regard to the issue of 
money was adopted by the Bank of England about 1783. 
In the Rise of the London Money Market, by W. R. Bisschop, 
on pages 168 and 169, we read : " Whilst in 1780 the value of 
the notes in circulation was about £6,500,000, this amount had 
risen to £9,500,000 in 1783. About this time the Bank adopted 
the unfortunate theory that the note circulation should be 
contracted simultaneously with an efflux of gold from the 
Bank, in order to bring about a reflux of the specie withdrawn. . . 
The author of this idea was Mr. Bosanquet." In a note the 
same author adds : " According to Mr. Bosanquet the single 
fact sufficed that gold was withdrawn from the Bank irrespective 
of the question whether it was required for internal circulation 
or for abroad." 

It is quite clear that making the volume of money dependent 
on the volume of gold not only divorced the supply of money 
available in the country from any relation to the actualization 
of the country's productivity, but by causing the amount of 
money to fluctuate was bound to prove disastrous for the 
stability of the price-level. It is not necessary to elaborate 
the first point, as it is quite clear. The second is excellently 
treated by Mr. Geoffrey Crowther in An Outline of Money, 
" The two functions of the gold standard," he writes, " are 
quite distinct. The first, aiming at control of the volume of 
note issue, is obviously concerned with the internal value 
of the currency ; we may, therefore, call it the Domestic 
Gold Standard. The second, aiming at the stability of the 
external value of the currency, we call the International Gold 
Standard. . . The cardinal point in the Domestic Gold 
Standard is clearly the proportion of volume enforced by the 
law between the gold reserve and the currency. The essence 
of the International Gold Standard is the convertibility of the 
currency into gold — that is, the fixed proportion of value 
between a unit of gold and a unit of currency. . . Not only is 
a minimum gold reserve a wasteful way of regulating the volume 
of the currency, it is also a most capricious one. For it does 
not stabilize the volume of the currency, it merely stabilizes 
the relations between the volume of gold and the volume of 
the currency, and if the volume of gold is itself fluctuating, 
the Domestic Gold Standard does not stabilize the volume of 
the currency but forces it to fluctuate. . . An expanding, 
progressive world needs an expanding supply of currency, 
and if the annual percentage increment to the gold stock does 
not equal the annual increase in the demand for currency 



The Functioning of the Gold Standard Monetary System ij 

there will tend to be either an excess or a deficiency of currency, 
and hence a tendency to rising or falling prices. This can be 
clearly seen from the monetary history of the nineteenth 
century." Since " pursuit of price stability is not compatible 
with maintenance of the gold standard," the principle adopted 
by the Bank of England about 1783 was in reality the abandon- 
ment by those manipulating the primary currency of the world 
of the essential property of an exchange-medium. 

Another evil arising out of the adoption of the Domestic 
Gold Standard is that gold can be cornered and thus the power 
to see-saw prices in different countries will fall into the hands 
of a few men. It is bad enough to have to endure instability 
of prices owing to the action of what we may call natural 
causes on the supply of gold : it is the very reversal of order 
to have the well-being of the community, the Common Good, 
at the mercy of a few schemers, while the National Government 
looks on helplessly. " Always remember," writes Miss G. M. 
Coogan in Money Creators, " that the price of an ounce of 
gold, in terms of the currency of any nation, is purely arbitrary : 
it is fixed either by law, as in so-called fixed-conversion 
countries (U.S.A., Holland, France), or by open market 
bidding by the gold brokers (England, the Colonies, Argentine, 
etc.). . . Gold brokers, it is reported, meet daily in London 
at the office of the Rothschilds. The Rothschilds are very 
conveniently the agents for the Royal Mint. The following 
firms (in addition to N. M. Rothschild and Sons) appear to 
constitute the assembly of gold brokers : Samuel Montague 
and Co., 114 Old Broad Street, London, E.C.2 ; Mocatta and 
Goldsmid, 7 Throgmorton Ave., London, E.C.2 ; Pixley and 
Abell, Palmerston House, Old Broad Street, London, E.C.2 ; 
Sharpe and Wilkins, 19 Great Winchester Street, London, 
E.C.2. After England suspended gold payments in 193 1 the 
gold brokers began to change the purely arbitrary price of an 
ounce of gold in London and in the British Colonies." 

" Gold has been cornered, scrambled for, and hoarded," 
said the Rt. Hon. Winston Churchill in 1932. " It has risen 
enormously in price and the value of everything we have or 
earn has been diminished accordingly. This monstrous 
process has only to be continued long enough to shatter the 
civilisation, as it has already broken the prosperity, of the world 
as we have known it." 1 

1 Quoted in the Introduction to Tyranny of Gold, by Hiskett. 



1 8 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

THE BANKERS' DISCOVERY 

Given the defective principles of money-manipulation 
outlined in the last section, it is easy to see how the financiers 
came to occupy their present dominant position in modern 
States. The bankers observed that about 90 per cent, of their 
total stock of gold remained in their vaults entirely undisturbed, 
and that only about 10 per cent, of the precious metal was 
required for the normal transaction of business. The Banks 
then began to circulate far more promises to pay gold than 
they had gold to meet, and to collect interest on the fictitious 
money. The bankers " discovered that they could lend far 
more money than they possessed," writes Sir Reginald Rowe 
in The Root of All Evil, " that is to say, that they could issue 
far more promises to pay in gold than they could meet with all 
the gold of their coffers. This was because it was found in 
practice that the promised payments were never simultaneously 
demanded ; in fact, except in crises, never more than one- 
tenth of these at any time." 

What bankers had discovered was simply the working of the 
law of averages. Modern organization of money and banking 
depends almost entirely on the law of large numbers. If tokens 
were issued, say, to about a dozen people, one could never 
predict what would happen. The whole dozen might walk 
in and claim gold. But when one is dealing with millions of 
people the lodgements and withdrawals will tend to cancel 
out. Similarly a company could not insure only twelve people, 
for it could not predict their mortality ; but it can make a good 
statistical prophecy about twelve thousand. In the days of the 
gold standard, " redeemability of notes could normally be 
kept up," writes Professor O'Rahilly in Money, " because 
though a number of people presented notes and obtained 
gold, a practically equal number presented gold and obtained 
notes. Thus it was not necessary to keep a gold backing for 
every note issued. It was sufficient ... to keep a marginal 
amount, that is, sufficient to cover fluctuations about the 

average If the redeemable tokens are issued on a sufficiently 

large statistical scale, the excess of withdrawls over lodgements 
in any period — and the excess of lodgements over withdrawals 
in some other period — will be reduced to a small fraction of 
the total concerned. Moreover, these fluctuations will become 
regular and predictable. , . Thus it becomes quite safe . . . 
to issue redeemable tokens to which no gold corresponds." 
In other words, the goldsmiths or bankers found that they 



The Functioning of the Gold Standard Monetary System 19 

could not only lend nine-tenths of the gold originally entrusted 
to them but also that they could put into circulation, through 
" credit-worthy " borrowers, their own notes or receipts up 
to ten times the amount of these nine-tenths and yet be certain 
in practice of being able to pay out gold on demand for the 
proportion of notes presented at the cashier's desk. By the 
covering of 10 per cent, the bankers were always able to 
maintain the illusion that the whole of their notes and receipts 
were convertible into gold or were " backed " by gold. " The 
successful maintenance of this illusion," writes Jeffrey Mark, 
whose explanation in The Modern Idolatry I have just sum- 
marized, " which depends essentially on the proportion of 
people in the community who, in practice, are likely to and do 
present their notes for gold redemption at the same time, 
is the ' convertible paper ' and the ' sound ' money of the 
modern banking system." 

" If we add to this fact," the same writer continues, " that 
these ' fictitious loans ' (to borrow a convenient phrase from 
Prof. Soddy) were only granted against evidence of tangible 
security deposited with the goldsmith in an amount always in 
excess of the loan, and that this security was confiscated by the 
goldsmith if these ' loans ' were not ' repaid ' when called, 
we have an accurate picture in miniature of the modern 
financial system, under whose dictates we all necessarily live 
and suffer. Modern finance, even in the complicated medley 
of bugaboo which is carried on under the sounding titles of 
High Finance and International Finance, is simply a vast 
elaboration and mystification based absolutely on these simple 
but mysterious principles." 1 

The toleration by the State of this practice of lending promises 
to pay to ten times the amount of money which the bankers 
had in their possession was the second and more important 
step in the bankers' advance to control in modern States. 
From the point of view of the ordinary man, and especially 
of the poor, it was the second and more fatal error. In point 
of fact, Governments later on failed to realize that the so-called 
promises-to-pay, i.e. cheques, had become money, in fact a 
far more important category of money than that issued by the 
State. 

1 The Modern Idolatry is published by Chatto and Windus, London. 



CHAPTER IV 

NATIONAL FINANCE AND THE GOLD STANDARD 

Having seen the fundamental principles underlying the 
orthodox functioning of the Gold Standard, let us now examine 
the system at work in national finance. In the next chapter 
we shall see its effects on international trade. 

Let us first examine the approximate figures of the various 
elements composing the medium of exchange in Great Britain, 
the country of origin of the Gold Standard system of finance. 
The figures are taken from page 55 of the excellent work 
already quoted, namely, The Modern Idolatry, by Jeffrey 
Mark. They are not meant by the author of this book, published 
in 1934, to set forth the exact amount in use, but to give a 
fairly accurate idea of the proportion which each kind of 
exchange-medium bears to the others and to the whole amount. 
The actual figures may vary considerably, but the ratios 
between the categories remain substantially the same. 

In Great Britain, out of £3,500 millions of exchange-medium, 
approximately 10 millions are in copper or bronze, 40 millions 
are in silver, 450 millions in Bank of England notes, and 2,000 
millions are what are called Bank deposits. Bank deposits are 
really loans made by the banks and finally controlled by the 
Central Bank, in this case, the Bank of England. " Of the 
450 millions in bank notes some 250 millions represent the 
British 1 pound and zo shilling Treasury notes issued during the 
World War, which in 1928, under the terms of the Banknotes 
and Currency Act, came under the control and are now the 
virtual property of the Bank of England. . . State-issued 
money now consists entirely of the bronze (or copper) and 
silver coins, that is, about £50 millions. The Banks now own 
and claim as their property some £2,450 millions out of £2,500 
millions. It is, therefore, clear that the British Banks have 
created, except for about 2 per cent., and now own, all the money 
in circulation in England, as a debt against the community. . . 
The situation in the U.S.A., and indeed in all civilized countries 
to-day, is substantially the same." Before we pass on, a remark 
must be made about the use of the word " own " in the above 
quotation from Mr. Jeffrey Mark. " Controls or administers '* 



National Finance and the Gold Standard zi 

would be more accurate. Professor O'Rahilly treats of the point 
on pp. 70-148 and again on p. 358 of his invaluable work, 
Money. 

In 1934, therefore, about 98 per cent, of the money of 
Great Britain was controlled by the Banks. We need not make 
any distinction from this point of view between notes and bank 
deposits, for whether on the presentation of security ,£1,000 
is credited to a man's account in a bank ledger and he writes 
cheques against it, or he obtains that bank's own notes for ,£1 ,000 
and spends them, a " deposit " has been created or an 
" advance " made — and money or exchange-medium has been 
brought into being. Notes give a clearer impression of new 
exchange-medium being put into circulation ; that is all. 
" What is created in the first instance," writes D. W. Maxwell 
in The Principal Cause of Unemployment, " is a bank deposit 
or what is called a ' deposit.' For instance, if Mr. X obtains 
an ' advance ' of £50 against security on Dec. 30 and does not 
spend it, the bank balance sheet of Dec. 31 will include the 
following items among many similar items : — 

Liabilities Assets 

Deposit of Mr. X . . £50 Advance to Mr. X. £50 

A bank ' deposit * has been created." * 

" There is no economic difference," writes Professor 
O'Rahilly in Money, " between those two methods (notes and 
cheques) of creating new purchasing money. There would be 
no difference at all if, instead of giving the customer a book 
of blanks to be filled up as required, the banks were to issue 
a block of coupons of denominations such as 10s., £1, etc. 
As things are there is merely a slight juridical distinction 
between a bank note and a cheque ; a note is an absolute 
obligation to pay ; a cheque is a contingent obligation, it may be 
dishonoured if the customer has overdrawn beyond his 
agreement. . . Hence there is no real social or economic 
difference between (1) a bank of issue which creates new 
purchasing power by the emission of notes and, (2) a bank-of- 
deposit which creates new purchasing power by the issue of 
credit transferable by cheque. The confusion of thought is 
chiefly due to the persistence of the word ' deposit * which no 
longer means deposition but a debt." 

These points must be insisted upon because of the mistaken 

1 The Principal Cause of Unemployment is published by Williams & 
Norgate, Ltd., London. 



22 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

idea that people have that " the function of the banker is, 
firstly, to take care of ' their ' money, and, secondly, to make 
profits by lending ' their ' money to other people at a higher 
rate of interest than they themselves allow on deposits or on 
checking accounts. In the true sense of the word, the public 
do not own any money at all, and the phrase * bank-deposit ' 
is a legal euphemism. Seeing that all money comes into existence 
as a debt created in favour of the banking system of the world, 
the plain truth is that bankers must always lend their own 
(created) money however much it may be criss-crossed between 
private * debtors ' and * creditors ' subsequently. No one has 
really any money to lend to the banks on ' deposit ' because 
all money ' owned ' by depositors derives from a loan made 
by the banks to somebody else. . . Yet the line taken by 
bankers, when publicly explaining any new move in policy, 
is that they have done so to protect their depositors* money. . . 
The situation is simply this : Seeing that all credit is created 
, by bank loans, for every ' deposit ' in a bank, there is an 
equivalent loan somewhere else in the banking system, so that 
the total of ' deposits ' is equal to the totality of the bank 
loans. . . The amount of money in existence is increased 
if the aggregate of loans granted is greater than the aggregate 
of loans repaid or called in (credit expansion). It is decreased 
if the aggregate of loans granted is less than the aggregate 
of loans called in or repaid (credit contraction). . . Now the 
extent to which a bank can make loans is determined by its 
' cash ' holdings, which, in England, varies with the amount 
of its balance at the Bank of England, as the Rt, Hon. Reginald 
McKenna, the able Chairman of the Midland Bank, laid 
down at a meeting of the Midland Bank Shareholders (in 
1937) : ' Variations in the quantity of money are due to 
variations in the total of bank cash. . . The total of bank 
cash is determined solely by the action of the Bank of England.' 
The authority of the Bank of England in fixing the amount 
of money in England is therefore absolute. The genesis of all 
inflations and deflations of the currency comes from a private 
corporation whose policy is not controlled by Parliament." 1 

Before passing on to speak of the evils of inflation and 
deflation, it will be well to explain the meaning of the phrase 
used above, namely, that " variations in the quantity of money 
are due to variations in the total of bank cash." Briefly it means 
that, as bankers are accustomed to lend promises-to-pay up 

3 The Modem Idolatry, by Jeffrey Mark. 



National Finance and the Gold Standard 23 

to ten times the amount of legal-tender money which they 
either possess or can count upon securing in case of a 'run' upon 
them, bankers' loans vary with the amount of their available 
legal-tender money. A banker's balance sheet shows how much 
legal-tender money he can count upon under the heading 
' Cash and Deposits at the Central Bank.' Cash is the amount 
of legal- tender money he has actually in his possession. Deposits 
at the Central Bank are the credit balance of the private bank 
at the Central Bank. Deposits at the Central Bank are reckoned 
as cash because they can be immediately converted into 
legal-tender money. The Central Bank will see to that. 

There is one very important difference between Cash and 
Deposits at the Central Bank. Cash is legal-tender money. 
Deposits at the Central Bank are a credit balance at the Central 
Bank, for which legal-tender money can be obtained. The Central 
Bank by what are called * open-market operations,' can increase 
or decrease the private bank's available supply of legal-tender 
money, on which it has lent ten times the amount. When the 
Central Bank buys securities in the open market, it pays for them 
by cheques drawn on itself. " The sellers of these securities 
lodge these cheques to their credit in their own banks . . . 
thus increasing their own deposits. The banks pass these 
cheques into the Central Bank, thus increasing their balance 
at the Central Bank. . . Hence the Central Bank by its 
open-market operation ' has increased the cash-ratio of the 
banking system. And it is easy to see that if the Central Bank 
sells securities (instead of buying them) it decreases the cash- 
ratio of the banks as a whole.!' Hence the Central Bank can 
control the lending powers of the private banks and increase 
or decrease the amount of exchange-medium in the country. 
The Central Bank is controlled by the movements of gold, 
when the gold standard is functioning. An export of gold 
forces the Central Bank to reduce the credit balances of the 
private banks. Those who wish to study these questions 
further will find these brief explanations developed in Promise 
to Pay by R. McNair Wilson and Money by Professor O'Rahilly. 1 

THE MEANING OF INFLATION AND DEFLATION 

We have seen that by far the greater part, in fact all except ' 
(less than) 2 per cent., of the exchange-medium in use in Great 
Britain comes into existence as a loan from the banks, in the 

1 Promise to Pay is published by George Routledge & Sons, Ltd. Money 
is published by the Cork University Press. 



24 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

form of promises-to-pay. We may say, then, that the exchange- 
medium of that country is practically created by the banks 
and that the rate of its creation is regulated by the private 
corporation called the Bank of England. " Instead of lending 
notes," writes Professor Soddy in The Role of Money, " the 
banks, in effect, now lend cheque-books and the right to draw 
cheques up to limited sums beyond what the borrower possesses. 
For nearly a century, until the revelations of the war made it 
impossible to conceal the truth from the general public, the 
bankers stoutly denied that they were creating any money 
at all, and claimed that they were merely lending the deposits 
their clients were not using. The President of the Bank of 
Montreal not a year ago continued to repeat this, but, nearer 
the centre of things, all this was known and admitted by the 
orthodox apologists for this monstrous system even before 
the War, usually by some such lying phrase as, ' Every loan 
makes a deposit.' A loan, if it is a genuine loan, does not make 
a deposit, because what the borrower gets, the lender gives up, 
and there is no increase in the quantity of money, but only an 
alteration in the identity of the individual owners of it. But 
if the lender gives up nothing at all, what the borrower receives 
is a new issue of money and the quantity is proportionately 
increased. So elaborately has the real nature of this ridiculous 
proceeding been surrounded with confusion by some of the 
cleverest and most skilful advocates the world has ever known, 
that it still is something of a mystery to ordinary people, 
who hold their heads and confess they are ' unable to under- 
stand finance.' It is not intended that they should." 

Let us now examine the .alternate periods of boom and 
depression known as the Trade Cycle or Credit Cycle. During 
the opening stage, money is increased by the fact that more 
bank loans are made than are repaid. This causes a rise in 
prices and a corresponding diminution in purchasing-power 
in the money already in the hands of people. This happens 
because the amount of exchange-medium is increased before 
goods are ready to be exchanged, in consequence of its being 
left to private individuals, frequently mere speculators, to 
decide how much money shall go into circulation. Their aim, 
of course, is not to keep the price-level stable, while enabling 
the potential productivity of the country to be developed, 
but to make profit for themselves. During the first stage, 
employment increases, producers and traders take loans. 
There is an increasing demand for goods. Prices continue to 
rise until purchasers at home, whose salaries and incomes have 



National Finance and the Gold Standard 25 

not risen in proportion, begin to buy abroad. This they can 
do by shipping gold instead of goods, for the price of gold is 
fixed and has not risen. But the moment gold begins to leave 
the country the bankers fear for their solvency, so they do not 
renew their loans when they are repaid. Money is thus with- 
drawn from circulation and the second stage of falling prices 
begins. 

The loans contracted when prices were rising have now to 
be paid back when prices are falling — borrowers have to sell 
far more goods in order to obtain the same quantity of money 
to pay the banks — so a number of traders go bankrupt. Their 
securities are sold up by the banks or held until later, when 
another boom will enable them to be disposed of advantageously. 
The speculators sell when prices are still high, that is, 
if they are " in the know," and then wait before buying 
again till prices have fallen to the lowest level. A period of 
depression sets in and continues till the Central Bank, the 
Bank of England, gives the signal for a new series of loans 
by buying securities. That action gives the sellers' bank a 
credit balance at the Bank of England. Thus that bank, having 
more " cash " at the Central Bank, can create more ledger- 
money. A new Credit Cycle begins and follows the same 
disastrous course as the former. The rise of prices in the 
first stage swindles all creditors for the benefit of debtors. 
The fall of prices in the second swindles all debtors for the sake 
of creditors. 

Ordinary people have a difficulty in following all this, because 
they always think of the bankers as lending money or exchange- 
medium that has an existence independent of the banker's 
fiat. "What is not generally realized about the ' Credit Cycle,' " 
writes R. McNair Wilson in Promise to Pay, " is that the 
bankers are making profits both ways, by compelling buyers 
to pay them tribute during the booms and by compelling 
sellers to pay them tribute during the slumps — and all this 
by means of loans of promises-to-pay what none of them 
possessed — money." Ordinary people seem to have accepted, 
as they are meant to do, the explanation that all these cycles 
are the working of the law of nature. They will do well to read 
the interesting speeches put into the mouths of bankers and 
others by Miss G. M. Coogan in Money Creators (p. 28) and 
R. McNair Wilson in Promise to Pay. 

According to Miss Coogan, the strong-room keeper, speaking 
at a meeting summoned to inquire into the cause of depression, 
" in a sad voice told the committee that he regretted more than 



26 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

anyone in the community that the laws of economics were so 
rigid and did place such burdens on mankind, particularly 
on the weaker members of the community. It made him very 
sad to see under-nourished and poorly-clad children . . . 
but man did not make the laws of economics and he, as a 
guardian of the community's money, could do nothing else 
but recognise those bitter laws. There was simply no solution 
for the problem except economy. . . The community would 
have to face its problems courageously and they would simply 
have to economise more until the people either paid what they 
owed or surrendered their property. That was the only sound 
solution. They certainly had no desire to violate the laws of 
economics." 

According to R. McNair Wilson, the banker waxes more 
lyrical about the laws of nature : " This movement of prices 
up and down," he declares, " is inherent in human nature. 
It belongs, too, to the nature of things as well as to the nature 
of men. Look at the seasons. Out of Winter darkness emerges 
the sunlight of Spring. . . But all too soon the days begin to 
draw in. . . Never forget that a banker's first duty is towards 
his clients, the honest and frugal folk who have entrusted to him 
the savings of their lifetime. . . Would you have him make 
use of your savings to attempt to change the laws of nature, 
to try to sow in the time of reaping ?. . . There is no financial 
conjuring trick, believe me, which can change by an iota that 
law of nature, that economic law, that inexorable economic 
law." 1 

SOME HISTORICAL EXAMPLES OF PLANNED DEFLATIONS 

The first example will be taken from the monetary system 
of the U.S.A. as outlined by Miss Coogan in her splendid 
book, Money Creators. She writes as follows : " Just one week 
after President Cleveland was inaugurated, the 4 Panic 
Circular ' was issued, March 12th, 1893. It appealed to the 
bond-holding classes to ' advocate an extra session of Congress 
for the repeal, unconditionally, of the Sherman Silver Law.' 
It was issued directly from the American Bankers' Association 

1 " The whole of that region (i.e., The East End of London)," wrote 
The Times at the time of the 1866 bank-crash, "is covered with huge 
docks, shipyards, manufactories and a wilderness of small houses, all full 
of life and happiness in brisk times but in dull times withered and lifeless, 
like the deserts we read of in the East. Now their spring is over. There 
is no one to blame for this ; it is the result of Nature's simplest laws." 
This is quoted by Christopher Hollis in The Two Nations (p. 102). 



National Finance and the Gold Standard 27 

and addressed to all * National Banks ' throughout the U.S.A." 
Miss Coogan then continues : 

" The following is a direct quotation from a resolution 
introduced to the 63rd Congress, First Section, April 29th, 
1913, by Hon. Charles A. Lindberg, Sen., : — 

" In eighteen hundred and ninety three a circular was 
sent out by the American Bankers' Association, an organization 
in which most bankers hold membership. It is known as the 
' Panic Circular of eighteen hundred and ninety three '. . . 
and was mailed to the National Banks. It read as follows : 

" Dear Sir : — The interests of national banks require 
immediate financial legislation by Congress. Silver, silver 
certificates, and Treasury notes must be retired, and National 
Bank notes on a gold basis (the phrase ' gold basis ' always 
means a debt basis) made the only money. This will require 
the authorization of 500,000,000 dollars to 1,000,000,000 
dollars of new bonds (debts) as the basis of circulation. You 
will at once retire one-third of your circulation (your paper 
money) and call in one-half of your loans. Be careful to make ' 
a monetary stringency among your patrons, especially among 
influential businessmen. Advocate an extra session of Congress 
to repeal the purchasing clause of the Sherman Law, and act 
with other banks of your city in securing a large petition to 
Congress for its unconditional repeal per accompanying form. 
Use personal influence with your Congressmen and particularly 
let your wishes be known to your Senators. The future life of 
national banks, as fixed and safe investments, depends upon 
immediate action as there is an increasing sentiment in favour 
of governmental legal-tender notes and silver coinage." x 

The second example of the functioning of the " economic 
law " of alternate boom and depression will be taken from the 
recent monetary history of Great Britain. In regard to this 
example we are particularly favoured, for eight years before the 
" coup " took place, Mr. Arthur Kitson foretold that it was 
being prepared. In his book, A Fraudulent Standard, published 
by King and Son, in 1917, we read : 

" Just now a few great financiers are contemplating the most 
gigantic ' deal ' that has probably ever been conceived, and 
one which if perpetrated by any other class of the community 
even on a very much smaller scale would be denounced as 
barefaced robbery. . . This deal is nothing less than doubling 
the national, and incidentally, all other debts, by doubling the 

1 The additions in brackets are from the pen of the Hon, C. A. Lindberg. 



28 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

present value of our monetary units. The object of this is to 
double the present value of their War Loan Investments, 
regardless of the terribly disastrous industrial and social 
results which must ensue. This robbery will be accomplished, 
if it is not checked in time by public sentiment, in a perfectly 
legal manner by a complacent Chancellor under the guise of a 
measure for the public welfare, for the sole purpose of removing 
' inflation ' and reducing prices that have risen mainly through 
the creation of the very currency and credit constituting 
the War Loans. The measure will aim at restoring what 
money-dealers term our ' good, sound, honest gold currency,' 
by destroying the Treasury notes and reducing bank credit 
to the pre-war proportions. The effect will naturally be to 
double the purchasing power of the pound at the expense 
of every wage-earner, producer, merchant, manufacturer, 
tradesman and taxpayer in the country. . . Nominally, of 
course, the amount of the War Debt will undergo no change. 
The figures will remain the same. . . By altering the value 
of the pound, which is easily accomplished, the trick is done 
and the debt, although nominally £6,000,000,000, becomes in 
reality £12,000,000,000 in terms of the present purchasing 
power of money, corresponding to the money actually on loan : 
similarly, although the normal rate of interest is 5 per cent., by 
this method of tampering with the value of the pound, these 
investors will actually receive 10 per cent, on their original 
investment. . . This will mean that every taxpayer will have 
to give at least twice the amount of his goods and labour to 
meet his taxes, than that which he has had to furnish under 
present conditions." 

In The Bankers* Conspiracy, pages 25-27, Mr. Kitson 
touches briefly upon the results of the re-establishment of the 
Gold Standard, foretold by him in 1917. " This document 
(The Cunliffe Currency Committee's Report), " he writes, 
" advised the adoption of certain monetary policies which 
were accepted by the Coalition Government of Mr. Lloyd 
George in 1920, under the Chancellorship of Mr. (now Sir) 
Austen Chamberlain, and is directly responsible for the most 
disastrous period in the industrial history of this country. 
Notwithstanding the ruinous results of the deflationary 
policy recommended in this report during the years immediately 
following its adoption, Mr. Winston Churchill intensified 
these evils by establishing the gold standard in 1925, which 
precipitated the great strike of 1926. . . The gold standard, 
re-established in 1925, after inflicting untold losses upon our 



National Finance and the Gold Standard 29 

industrial classes and taxpayers, had to be abandoned six 
years later to save the country from ruin. The same policies 
as those recommended by the Committee, have also been 
tried in other countries since the War and with similarly 
ruinous results ; hence the present World Crisis. By the 
universal adoption of the gold standard after its recommendation 
by the Cunliffe Committee, which was one of the main policies 
advocated by the League of Nations, an irresponsible super- 
Government was created, composed of a group of International 
Bankers. It required only a few years to prove the utter 
. incapacity of these men to manage the world's financial affairs, 
and if the people of all civilized countries are not yet convinced 
of the terrible dangers attending the supremacy of the banking 
interests, there will be a repetition of the economic disasters 
of the last few years — but of a much more intensive character." 
" We have to remember," writes Mr. Vincent C. Vickers, 
former director of the Bank of England, in Finance in the 
Melting Pot (p. 20), " that the value — that is to say, the 
purchasing power — of money, and consequently the price of 
goods, can be and has been varied intentionally and deliber- 
ately, not by the will or action of the State, but by those 
individuals who themselves manage and control the money — 
though they constantly aver that they act for, and on behalf 
of, the community. We returned to the Gold Standard in 1925 
for the benefit of the City of London, and so ruined our basic 
industries. It does not follow that what is best for the City 
of London is best for the country. 

" In consequence of past policy, a farmer who borrowed 
from his bank, say, in 1920, the money-equivalent of 100 
sacks of wheat, might be obliged to sell 200 sacks of wheat 
a few years afterwards in order to repay that same loan, simply 
because a pound became twice as valuable. 

" This is typical of the ' Gold Standard System,' which 
involves Inflation and Deflation. A Monetary system which 
begets such flagrant injustice, cannot be regarded as an equitable 
system. Yet no one in authority here dares to attempt to alter 
it, because the financiers don't want it altered." 

According to Christopher Hollis in The Two Nations 
(p. 232), " Mr. Winston Churchill claimed that the return to 
gold was no more responsible for the troubles in the mining 
industry [in 1926] than was the Gulf Stream." " But," he 
adds, " all serious students agreed with Mr. Keynes in dis- 
missing the argument as * feather-brained.' " At any rate 
Mr. Churchill thought differently in 1932. According to The 



30 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Standard (Dublin), July 14, 1944, he said in the House of 
Commons on April 21, 1932 : 

" When I was moved by many arguments and forces in 1925 
to return to the gold standard, I was assured by the highest 
experts, and our experts are men of great ability and of indis- 
putable integrity and sincerity, that we were anchoring our- 
selves to reality and stability, and I accepted their advice. I 
take for myself and my colleagues of other days whatever 
degree of blame and burden for having accepted their advice. 

" But what happened ? We have had no reality, no stability. 
The price of gold has risen since then by more than 70 per cent. 
That is as if a 12-inch foot rule had been stretched to 19 or 20 
inches, as if the pound avoirdupois had suddenly become 23 
or 24 ounces instead of 16. 

" Look at what this has meant to everybody who has been 
compelled to execute their contracts upon this irrationally 
enhanced scale. Look at the gross unfairness of such distortion 
to all producers of new wealth, and to all that labour and 
science and enterprise can give us. Look at the enormously 
increased volume of commodities which have to be created 
in order to pay off the same mortgage debt or loan. 

" Minor fluctuation might well be ignored, but I say quite 
seriously that this monetary convulsion has now reached a 
pitch where I am persuaded that the producers of new wealth 
will not tolerate indefinitely so hideous an oppression. . . . 

" I therefore point to this evil, and to the search for the 
methods of remedying it as the first, second and third of all 
the problems which should command and rivet our thoughts." 



CHAPTER V 

INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND THE GOLD 

STANDARD 

From what has just been said about the organization of 
national finance under the Gold Standard, it can be easily seen 
that the system will not work satisfactorily in the realm of 
international trade. It inevitably leads to a state of affairs 
where every country wants to export goods in order to have 
a favourable balance of trade and where no country wishes to 
import. As, however, the exports of one nation are the imports 
of another, this leads to a deadlock. Sir Reginald Rowe sets 
forth the reason for this absurd situation briefly and clearly: 
" If we consider the International Gold Standard system, 
we shall see that it did not ensure an exchange of goods and 
services between nations to their mutual, advantage but, on the 
contrary, ensured that nations should export their real wealth 
that is, goods and services, and obtain in return an admission 
of unpayable debt ; the debt was supposed to be payable in 
gold and was called a ' favourable ' balance, but if gold was, 
in fact, paid, the loss caused internal disaster to the country 
which paid it. Herein lies the reason, on the international 
side, why nations are so anxious to export and not import, 
although there is another internal reason connected with 
employment and the distribution of internal purchasing power 
through wages ; the latter is also a monetary problem. . . 
This country [England] for nearly 80 years had an annual 
so-called active * favourable ' balance of approximately 
£100,000,000. This meant that after it had paid all its bills 
to the world for all the imports and services it required, it still 
had £100 ,000 ,000 's worth of fore'gn currencies owing to it. 

" Let us suppose, for the sake of simplicity, that the Argen- 
tine owed England annually the whole of this amount. England 
was then in a position to say to the Argentine : ' We have 
bought and paid for all the meat and wheat we required from 
you during the last accounting period, and after doing so we 
still have ,£ioo,ooo,ooo's worth of pesos for which we have no 
use. We can, if you like, offer them for sale on the foreign 
exchange. If we do, some English exchange broker will give 

3* 



32 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

us pounds for them, but clearly as there is no immediate demand 
by Englishmen for them, no Englishman will give us their 
normal exchange value. He will expect to get more of them for 
his pound than the par value. In other words, if we offer these 
pesos for sale it will knock down your exchange rate. When 
it falls to the point where the loss in exchange would be 
greater than the loss represented by having to pay freight and 
insurance on the transport of physical gold, we shall cease 
selling pesos and go to the Central Bank of the Argentine 
and buy bars of gold ; we shall ship them physically to England 
and sell them to the Bank of England and so get our pounds 
that way. When, however, the Central Bank of the Argentine 
loses gold to us, it will be obliged to take out of circulation 
paper pesos to a corresponding value. This will mean that the 
commercial banks will find themselves with less cash and, in 
order to maintain the same relationship of their loans to their 
cash, will be obliged to call in loans. This will mean that 
Argentine producers, manufacturers and merchants, will be 
obliged to throw their stocks on an unwilling market in order 
to raise the money to repay their bank loans. The throwing of 
these stocks on the market will have the effect of knocking 
down prices. It will be necessary for you to try to reduce 
wages as with lower prices you will not be able to afford to 
pay the same rate of wages as before. This will lead to strikes, 
and in any case, will destroy the purchasing power of the 
Argentine market.' 

" The Argentine would reply, ' But this is terrible,' to which 
England was in a position to answer, ' Yes, devastating, and 
there is only one way out of the difficulty and that is that you 
borrow £ 100,000 ,000 's worth of pesos at interest so as to take 
them out of harm's way. There will then be only due from you 
the annual interest. Next year, however, there will probably 
be another £100,000,000 which you will similarly have to 
borrow plus the interest on this year's £100,000,000.' In 14 
years at 5 per cent, compound interest each £100,000,000 
would double itself. It will thus be seen that under the system, 
the Argentine was given the choice of getting hopelessly into 
debt to England or of losing gold with devastating effects." 1 

1 The Root of All Evil is published by the Economic Reform Club, 32, 
Queen's Avenue, Muswell Hill, London, N.io. 

There is another side to this question, namely, the side of the people 
induced to invest in foreign enterprises. Interest is paid on these loans only 
to the extent that the creditors make further advances to enable the bor- 
rowers to do so. Christopher Ho His treats the point excellently : " Every 
year with but few exceptions, if you count in our invisible exports such as 



International Trade and the Gold Standard 33 

The kernel of the difficulty of international trade under the 
Gold Standard system is that when a country's impprts 
exceed its exports, the banks are liable to be asked for gold 
to cover the deficit. The reason is that the exchange will go 
against the country whose exports are down. At a certain 
point it will come to be more advantageous for those who have 
to pay debts in another country to buy gold, the price of which 
is fixed, and ship it to the other country to buy the exchange- 
medium of that country. The export of gold will prevent the 
further fall of the exchange. For example, at one time, $4- 86 
bought one pound in the foreign exchange market, for each 
was worth the same amount of gold. If English exports to the 
U.S.A. came to exceed greatly English imports from the same 
country, there would be a great demand for pounds sterling 
and the cost of the pound in terms of dollars would gradually 
rise. When it reached $4-90, the difference between $4- 86 
and $4-90 would cover the cost of freight, insurance and loss 
of interest on gold. When gold could thus be bought and 
shipped, no one would pay more than $490 for a pound and the 
exchange would remain stable. Gold would be shipped in the 
opposite direction if the pound fell to about $4-84. 

But the ' drain of gold * as it is called, will have a disastrous 
effect on the gold-exporting country. " Since International 
Bankers, like Home Bankers, are lending promises-to-pay ten 
times the quantity of money they actually possess, it is obvious 
that strict limits are set to the export of gold ... In fact the 
International Bankers protect themselves by refusing to lend 
and trying to call up as many as possible of their existing 
loans — just as, in similar circumstances, the Home Bankers 
do." The results are that prices fall and the country tries to 
sell goods at a loss, while taking steps to recapture export 
trade by cutting down wages and dismissing workmen. Low 
wages mean the possibility of big exports. This means a 
lowering of the standard of living, especially of the wage- 
shipping and other services, we had a favourable balance of trade ; every 
year we gave away more than we received. Therefore it is evident that last 
year's foreign investor, who thought he was this year receiving his dividend 
from his foreign investment, was not really doing so at all. He was really 
living on the savings of this year's foreign investor, who in his turn was to 
live on the savings of next year's foreign investor, and so on and so on, 
until the system's final and inevitable collapse. . . . Our exports visible and 
invisible, every year considerably exceeded our imports and there was a 
surplus left over for foreign investment. What in truth regulated the 
quantity of goods which we sold abroad was the quantity of loans which 
our financiers saw fit to make to foreigners to enable them to buy those 
goods " {The Two Nations, pp. 95, 115). 



34 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

earners. " The people whom International Finance is playing 
off against each other," writes R. McNair Wilson in Promise 
to Pay, " are not merely the merchants and industrialists of 
the world. The wage-earners in every country are being 
pitted against the wage-earners in every other country. The 
attack on wages is everlasting and it is conducted by means 
of the wage-earners themselves who have nothing to hope for 
unless they can produce cheaply, that is to say, unless they will 
accept lower wages than all their competitors. . . The men, 
naturally, blame their masters ; the masters blame their 
men. Both are helpless in the hands of the International 
Bankers since it is they who control the quantity of money 
in their markets. , . If wages are not cut, half the businesses 
will be bankrupt. And when wages have been cut the whole 
hideous cycle will begin once more. Is it any wonder that, 
in such circumstances, Communism and Socialism, both 
will-o-the-wisps, flourish ? Is it any wonder that class is set 
against class ? Master against men ? Nation against nation ? 
Nobody suspects the true enemy." 

The whole tendency of the system, then, is to lower the 
standard of living, since a country with a lower standard of 
living or low wages will be able to export. It is true that the 
Gold Standard keeps the value of money of any country 
stable in terms of foreign currencies, but this is only another 
way of saying that it tends to prevent wages in any country 
from remaining high when wages anywhere else fall. The 
net result is a dreadful struggle for the necessaries of life in the 
midst of potential sufficiency, the struggle being made far 
more tragic by gambling in the different currencies and 
speculation on the stock-exchanges of the world. 

A striking example of gambling in currencies is given by 
Mr. Arthur Kitson in The Bankers* Conspiracy. He writes : 
" Some years ago The Bankers' Magazine gave a startling 
example of the depreciation in the prices of 325 of our represen- 
tative investments, caused by the withdrawal of £11,000,000 
in gold from the Bank of England by a group of American 
financiers. The transfer of this amount caused a fall of prices 
equivalent to £115,000,000. The absorption of the same gold 
caused a corresponding advance in the prices of certain 
American securities. By first selling English securities and 
then buying American, they had merely to transfer so much 
gold and afterwards reverse the transactions by buying and 
selling respectively and the game was won ! As a well-known 
financial writer stated at the time : ' These speculators were 



International Trade and the Gold Standard 35 

playing upon two tables at the same time — one in London and 
the other in New York — with the certainty of winning on 
both. 5 " 

Let us now examine a little more profoundly the reason 
for the urge to export goods, which every country experiences, 
in spite of the fact that many under-nourished and ill-clad 
people in almost every country lack the very goods that are 
being exported or the goods into which they could be converted. 
" Plenty of wool and no markets," announced a Dublin daily 
paper some time ago. " Plenty of poor and no blankets," 
was the very apposite comment of the humorous journal, 
Dublin Opinion. 

The ultimate reason for the urge to export is to be found 
in the fact that 98 per cent, of all the money in existence comes 
into being with a demand for interest at 5 per cent, attached 
to it. We have already seen that in 1934 Bank-created money 
in Great Britain was over 98 per cent., while State-created 
money was less than 2 per cent. Now, " no more money can 
come out of the system than is put into it. If a certain proportion 
of businesses manage to pay back both principal and interest 
of their loans, the possibility or actuality of bankruptcy is 
automatically intensified for the whole of the remainder." 
The payment of the interest of money brought into existence 
as a debt involves the payment of more than is issued. This 
cannot be done without further borrowing, so the process 
means steady progression into debt for the society as a whole. 
It necessarily means also that, in every business cycle, a certain 
amount of the goods produced in that cycle remains 
unpurchased. This unpurchased surplus is increased by the 
fact that certain individuals in the society save up and re-invest 
their savings. Thus, as industry develops thanks to more and 
more loans, there is an ever increasing surplus remaining 
unpurchased within the area of the society, and there is an 
ever increasing demand for foreign markets. Debts, however, 
increase much faster than production, and production increases 
far more rapidly than distribution ; so the urge to send goods 
abroad is accompanied by a proportionately increasing inability 
on the part of the inhabitants of the home-country to profit 
by the developing production. " The inevitable result of a 
financial system based on usury," writes Mr. Jeffrey Mark, 
" is the progressive accumulation of debt and a complementary- 
decrease in the ratio between consumption and production. 
Between 1922 and 1929, for instance, debt claims in the United 
States increased 76 per cent., against an increase in manufac- 



36 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

tured output of only 33 per cent,, and the distribution of con- 
sumer goods only 4 per cent." The standard of living was raised 
but not at a rate commensurate with the increase in production. 
Accordingly, the inevitable condition of foreign trade under 
the Gold Standard System is that every industrially developed 
nation must strive to export more than it imports. " If some 
nations have * favourable ' balances of payments," we read in 
A Twentieth Century Economic System, " other nations must 
have * unfavourable ' ones. International trade has therefore 
degenerated into financial war, instead of being an exchange 
of goods and services to the mutual advantage of both parties." 

THE URGE TO WAR AND DESTRUCTION 

It is unnecessary to dwell at length on the way the system 
we have described impels towards war. As practically every 
nation is suffering from " over-production " and is trying to 
get rid of a " surplus," which its own impoverished thousands 
cannot purchase, the success of one nation in exporting means 
the intensification of the difficulties of another. Hitherto 
what was termed " industrial progress," along the lines 
indicated, could be maintained by the exploitation of 
" backward " nations. But now the once " backward " nations 
have themselves a " surplus " to export. A terrible struggle 
for control of the remaining partially developed countries 
and a state of tension, which the armament manufacturers 
view with a glowing gratification because of their particular 
" surplus stocks," are inevitable. 1 

War means wholesale indiscriminate destruction, but peace, 
too, under the present monetary system means wholesale 
systematic destruction. Why is this ? Because thus the prices 

1 To Catholic students of history I would strongly recommend p. 317 in 
The Two Nations, by Christopher Hollis. " It was mainly into the countries 
of Spanish America," he there writes, " that American capital found its 
way. Some of it went there for those countries' economic development ; 
other loans were political. For these latter there was almost a regular 
formula. It would be suggested to General X that he should raise a revolu- 
tion against President A. Money would be lent to him to make the revolu- 
tion and to President A to suppress it. For a time the loans would be so 
controlled as to keep the rival fighting forces roughly equal. Then, when 
it appeared that no more could be squeezed out of the country, one of the 
combatants would be offered far more liberal loans than his rival on the 
condition that, when successful, he made himself responsible for his rival's 
debt as well as his own. The Church would be either pillaged or reinstated 
according to whether it had been found the more convenient to make 
the liberals or the conservatives win. ... It [this formula] was used by 
Woodrow Wilson to establish in power the anti -clerical regime of Madero 
in Mexico and to depose President Sam from the Presidency of Haiti." 



International Trade and the Gold Standard 37 

of the remaining stocks will be raised, it is hoped, and the 
producers will be enabled to meet some of the interest-claims 
on their debts. We have seen that production and distribution 
of real wealth are tolerated in so far as they facilitate the.payment 
of interest on debts. Production and distribution which 
threaten to interfere with such payments cannot be allowed. 
Tariffs and quotas and the formation of Boards for Planned 
Economy and Orderly Marketing are employed, as well as 
systematic destruction, to diminish and check production. 
Distribution, already terribly ineffectual, of course, suffers 
proportionately. The tariffs, quotas and Boards are very 
effective in reducing production and hampering distribution, 
but destruction is more spectacular, so it attracts more attention. 
" In July, 1933, in Liverpool," writes Mr. Jeffrey Mark in 
The Modern Idolatry, " thousands of cases of oranges were 
dumped into the sea, as it would have been a c loss to land them.' 
Up to April 30th, 1932, 5,600,722 bags of coffee had been 
purchased for destruction by the National Coffee Council 
of Brazil. Some eight months later, the National Coffee 
Council announced plans ... for the stabilization of coffee 
prices, including the destruction of 12,000,000 bags in the 
next twelve months and the placing of an additional tax of 
five shillings a bag on coffee exports from the country. The 
decision to destroy the 12,000,000 bags was reported as 
unanimous by the New York Times of December 7th, 1932. . . 
In the middle of July, 1933, Mr. Wallace, the Secretary for 
Agriculture in the United States, announced the success of the 
scheme (to take land out of cultivation) by the statement that 
10,000,000' acres under cotton had been left to waste, the 
potential crop being thereby reduced by 3,500,000 bales. 
The bonuses to farmers for this strange attempt to relieve the 
lot of a half-starved world involved a sum of approximately 
100,000,000 dollars. 

" At the same time, a long drought, heat and the ravages of 
grasshoppers united in causing severe damage to the American 
wheat crop, so that, according to London Daily Mail for the 
28th June, 1933, nature is helping President Roosevelt to 
restrict production, thereby ' paving the way to world recovery.' 
The news of this triple disaster from drought, blight and 
grasshoppers was received with acclamation by farmers, 
salesmen, press and public in the Chicago Wheat Pit, and it is 
clear that the universal obsession with regard to money and 
debt has driven the world mad, when there is more joy over 
one crop that fails than over ninety-nine bounteous harvests. " 



38 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Similar information about the same points was given in an 
article in the Catholic Herald (London), which stated that 
" a regular feature of our capitalist-ridden economy was the 
destruction of the fruits of the earth as a legitimate method of 
maintaining price-levels at a profitable height. Thus, for this 
reason, in August, 1933, between England and Spain, 
1,500,000 oranges were thrown into the sea deliberately. 
Even more disgraceful has been the pouring into the river 
Clyde of gallons of rich milk obtained from Irish cows imported 
and landed at Glasgow. And, of course, the burning of coffee 
in Brazil is quite well known, although perhaps it is not generally 
realized on what a gigantic scale this has been done. Between 
193 1 and 1936 about 40,000,000 bags have been destroyed . . . 
enough to supply the whole world for nearly a year and a 
half." 

This destruction is forced upon producers in the endeavour 
to raise the price of the remainder of their stocks, so that they 
may make an attempt to pay back a portion of their loans 
with interest. But the operation of destruction is itself costly. 
The Government must either procure the sum by taxation 
or borrow it from the banks and then pay it back — with 
interest — from taxation. In either case the burden upon the 
producers and consumers is increased. " So that, either 
way," writes Mr, Mark, " in order to exercise a compulsory 
privilege to destroy goods which it has itself produced, which it 
desperately needs, but which it cannot buy because of an 
existing intolerable debt burden, the community must add 
to the debt." 

Since there seemed to be no immediate possibility of getting 
the financiers in control to consider the very foundations 
of the system which was driving the Government of the richest 
country in the world to pay people not to produce, whilst 
many were suffering from dire want, one man at least drew the 
logical conclusion. The U.S.A. Financial Chronicle for August 
1 8th, 1934, published the following letter to the Editor : — 

" Sir : — A friend of mine in New England has a neighbour 
who has received a cheque for 1,000 dollars this year for not 
raising hogs. So my friend wants to go into the business 
himself, he not being very prosperous just now. He says, 
in fact, that the idea of not raising hogs appealed to him very 
strongly. Of course, he will need a hired man, and that is 
where I come in. . . 

"... The friend who gets 1,000 dollars got it for not 
raising 500 hogs. Now we figure that we might easily not raise 



International Trade and the Gold Standard 39 

1,500 or 2,000 hogs, so you see that the possible profits are 
only limited by the number of hogs we do not raise. The other 
fellow has been raising hogs for forty years and never made 
more than 400 dollars in any one year. Kind of pathetic, 
isn't it, to think how he wasted his life raising hogs when he 
could have made so much more by not raising them. 
" I will thank you for any advice you may offer. 

" Yours very truly, 

Harold Trurman." 1 

The writer of the above letter had evidently grasped the 
absurdity of a financial system by which it is more advantageous 
to pay men a dole for doing nothing than to pay them wages 
to produce real wealth. 

Though it is an obvious fact that it is the defective functioning 
of the financial system that hampers the production and mutual 
exchange of all the goods and services available, yet a number 
of financial experts, as well as many politicians and industrialists 
speak of over-production, while never mentioning under- 
consumption through lack of purchasing power. The paradoxes 
of over-production, such as, hunger in Great Britain while 
many thousands of tons of wheat lie unsold in the Dominions 
and Dominion farmers lack many things, machinery, etc., 
which could be supplied by the unemployed of Great Britain, 
ships lying idle meantime for lack of freights, are attributed 
by them to defective arrangements on the part of farmers and 
manufacturers, and other purely industrial causes. They 
certainly cannot attribute these paradoxes to lack of transport 
facilities, or to insufficient development of the arts of adver- 
tising and salesmanship. ' These are more than ample for the 
work of distribution. Yet ignoring the question of monetary 
reform, they accept the proposals of the moneyed interests — 
restriction of production and rationalization of industry. 

A brief quotation from G. K. Chesterton's Chaucer will 
fittingly bring this section to a close. " These gallant men," 
he wrote, " who stormed the gates of the sunset to set up the 
golden banners of Spain, were fortunately unaware that they 
were fixing on a peak in Darien the enigmatic ensign that we 
call the Gold Standard." 

1 Quoted in Professor Skinner alias Montague Norman, p. zi"j. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE EFFECTS OF THE GOLD STANDARD SYSTEM 

ON HUMAN LIFE 

The purpose of money, according to St. Thomas, is to facilitate 
exchanges in view of the development of the Supernatural 
Life of members of Christ. We have seen that the functioning 
of the Gold Standard has led not only to something of a 
deadlock in international trade, but to the destruction of food 
and the lessening of production. The fundamental reason 
for this has been stated more than once. It lies in the perversion 
of order involved in the system. Instead of the right order, 
according to which the manipulation of money is intended 
to facilitate production, distribution and exchange, in view of 
strengthening family life, men are now sacrificed for production, 
while production and consumption, in their turn, are sacrificed 
for interest on debt. Instead of being an instrument of 
Economics and Politics, money is the end. This fundamental 
disorder, viz., the domination of money, shows itself in human 
life in a multitude of evil effects. Let us consider the disastrous 
consequences on Farming and Bread, omitting the trends in 
regard to Ownership, Medical Service and Patent Medicines. 1 

FARMING 

The production of primary goods is sacrificed to the pro- 
duction of luxury articles and goods of secondary importance. 
We have seen that the creation of money with a demand for 
interest leads to goods being unsold in every trade-cycle and 
that the volume unsold increases with the expansion of debt. 
Now the rhythm of production of secondary and manufactured 
goods can be accelerated enormously in the endeavour to 
accomplish the impossible task of getting out of debt. But 
agriculture is dependent on tfie seasons ; its rhythm cannot be 
accelerated in the same proportion, and the attempt to do some- 
thing similar by the exploitation of virgin soils is disastrous in 
its effects on those soils. 

1 For these points the reader is referred to The Mystical Body of Christ 
and the Reorganisation of Society, Chapter XIX. 

40 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human Life 41 

This last point can be disposed of first. For an adequate 
treatment of it the reader is referred to two outstanding books, 
The Labouring Earth, by C. Alma Baker, C.B.E., and The Rape 
of the Earthy by G. V. Jacks and R. O. White. In the introduc- 
tion to the former by the Rt. Hon. Lord Addison, we read : 
" There is no doubt as to the justice of the author's first main 
contention — that, in the desire to make money out of it quickly 
mankind has wasted the precious earth wholesale, turned 
fertile lands into deserts and presented us with wide landscapes 
of rubbish in place of cultivated fields. We have systematically 
taken organic matter from the soil and not replaced it." The 
following passages from pages 25 and 28 of the second book 
are a striking confirmation of Mr. Baker's thesis : "In 
Europe. . .the countryside has been desecrated and scarred 
with ugliness in many places, but the one inviolable condition 
on which man holds the lease of land from Nature — that soil 
fertility be preserved — has in the main been respected. . . 
In the New World. . . with few exceptions, profit and wealth 
have been most easily won by exploiting and exhausting the 
virgin soils. In particular grassland soils required only a 
superficial cultivation to convert them immediately into almost 
ideal arable soils, rich in plant food, perfect in tilth, and appar- 
ently incapable of further improvement. Or they afforded 
rich and extensive pastures without having to be touched 
at all. . . The insatiable demands of the Old World and the 
progress of agricultural science and machinery offered immense 
profits and further opportunities for exploitation to the man 
who cashed his soil fertility for labour-saving and yield- 
increasing devices. . . Nineteenth century economy, especially 
within the British Empire, was based on the mutual exchange 
of agriculture and industrial produce. That the New World 
was being robbed of its soil and was being paid in coin that 
brought no recompense to the land never entered the heads 
of either partner to a bargain which seemed . . . natural, 
sensible, and highly satisfactory to all concerned." 

It did seem quite natural to all concerned, for it was all part 
of the system of procuring cheap food, in order to keep the 
wages of English workers low and enable English industry 
to pay interest on loans contracted from the banks. The 
domination of finance caused the development of industry 
in England at the expense of agriculture with its slower rhythmic 
movement. Then came the importation of cheap food from the 
virgin soil of America, which resulted in the ruinous exploitation 
of the latter and brought English agriculture into stagnation 

D 



42 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

and decay. In The Two Nations (p. 118), Christopher Hollis 
points out that the countries that had borrowed from England 
could only continue to pay even the interest on their debts on 
condition of exporting something to England. If they did not 
send something " it would not be possible to raise the new 
loans with which to pay the interest on the old loans." They 
could only export food and that food could only find a market 
in England " on one of two conditions. Only, if either the wages 
of the poor were raised so that they could buy more than the 
subsistence quantity of food, or if English domestic agriculture 
was sabotaged, so as to create a gap which the foreign food 
could fill. According to the canons of the system, the former 
alternative, that of raising wages, was inadmissible. Therefore 
it was necessary to adopt the second and to destroy English 
agriculture. Hence the necessity for repealing the Corn 
Laws." Later, on p. 147, he adds that " owing to the Crimean 
War and the American Civil War there had been artificial 
obstacles to prevent the development of a large foreign supply 
of corn. As late as 1874 there were still 3,821,655 acres under 
wheat in comparison with about 4,000,000 before Repeal." 

" English Farming," writes Commander Herbert Shove, 
D.S.O., in The Fairy Ring of Commerce, " held its own, in a 
rapidly growing market, for a generation after the repeal of the 
Corn Laws, but fell again in the eighties, when the exploitation 
of virgin soil brought it up against a system of living on capital 
in its own domain, whose products were brought into competi- 
tion with the home-grown ones through the usurious aid of 
coal, both in transporting them and cheapening the goods 
exported to. pay for them. The building of the American 
transcontinental trunk railways marked the final conquest 
of the English plough by the steam engine." 

The same writer points out another revolution which had 
been going on before that in English farming, under the rule 
of finance. It was the process of increasing rent by the conver- 
sion of tillage land to sheep-walks and cattle ranches. The same 
process was going on in Ireland under the same influences 
from 1830 to 1880, with an added source of bitterness in the 
fact that the landlords were aliens in religion and nationality, 
and the tenants were the dispossessed owners of the soil. 
Grazing paid better, so human beings gave place to cattle. 1 

1 Goldsmith's Deserted Village depicts in beautiful language some of the 
consequences of this transformation. 

In his Life of Goldsmith Macaulay says that The Deserted Village is 
composed of incongruous elements'. " The village in its happy days," 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Hitman Life 43 

With the relentless grinding of the money machine, there 
came a time when it did not " pay " to keep up the big houses. 
It was inevitable. 

Let us now take some quotations from unquestioned author- 
ities dealing explicitly with the effect of the domination of 
finance on agriculture with its seasonal rhythm. " The 
fundamental processes of farming," writes Sir John Russell in 
English Farming , " are governed by Nature's laws and not by 
our own: seed times and harvest, the period needed to produce 
an animal, the age at which a cow can begin to give milk — 
these and many other things which set the pace of farming 
operations are out of our control. The unit of time is not the 
day or the week, but the year ; sometimes indeed it is longer, 
and covers the whole period of the rotation. Farming, therefore, 
cannot be changed rapidly, and a system once adopted can 
be altered only slowly ; this has often caused farmers to be 
wrongly regarded as very conservative and unwilling to change 
their so-called old-fashioned ways. . . During three-quarters 
of the nineteenth century this (famous four-course or Norfolk) 
rotation proved admirably suited to British conditions, and it 
was developed to a high standard of technical efficiency. . . 

he writes. " is a true English village. The village in its decay is an Irish 
village." While not wishing to deny the activity of Goldsmith's imagination, 
I think that Macaulay, being a Whig, has not taken full account of the 
English Enclosure Acts, of which, according to the note in the Clarendon 
Press edition of The Deserted Village, there were 700 between 1760 and 
1774. " Over three million acres," the note adds, " were thus appropriated 
(by the landlords) in the eighteenth century in England ; and in Goldsmith's 
boyhood a General Napier had enclosed a large tract of land near Lissoy 
(Ireland) ejecting the cottagers in order to improve his estate." In The 
Fairy Ring of Commerce [p. 114), Commander H. Shove gives the accounts 
of an English parish about 1746, before enclosure, and about 1786, after 
enclosure. " The landlord," we read, " obtained £663 more rent. . . 
Four farmers at least doubled if not trebled their incomes, and if seventy- 
eight households were driven off into penury out of this one parish, it was 
nobody's business and nobody cared." 

Other writers, too, may be quoted about the Enclosures in England. 
In A Shorter History of England (p. 508), H. Belloc writes : " In the fifty 
years before the accession of George III (1760) 300,000 acres had been 
enclosed ; in the next lifetime seven millions — one-third of the useful land — 
were taken from the people and went to swell the new capitalist power." 
" Under Queen Anne," writes Dr. M. Hasbach in A History of the English 
AgriculUtral Labourer (p. 57), " only two Enclosure Acts were passed ; 
under George I, sixteen ; under George II, as many as 226, making altogether 
244 in fifty years. But under George III there were 3,554 : and by the end 
of his reign 5,686,400 acres had been enclosed. . ." 

Though the Clarendon Press edition of The Deserted Village says that 
Goldsmith had Lissoy in his mind, the above testimonies prove that there 
is no lack of justification for Goldsmith's lines : 

" A time there was, ere England's griefs began. 
When every rood of ground maintain'd its man ;" 



44 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

But from about 1880 onwards the opening up of the North 
American prairies led to the production of quantities of wheat 
which was sold here at prices far below those at which our 
farmers could produce it. Public opinion was entirely against 
the imposition of any tariff on food, and farmers both on the 
prairies and at home were left to solve the problem as best they 
could. The prairie farmers suffered and had to accept a very 
low standard of living and to adopt methods which led ultimately 
to terrible destruction of the soil. The home farmers suffered 
equally ; many went under, and there was great distress in the 
countryside." 

" Erosion," writes Lord Northbourne in Look to the Land, 
" is nearly all man's work. Some of it can be attributed to 
mere foolishness. But most of it is due to greed combined 
with the existence of the possibility of getting rich quickly 
by exhausting the land and under-selling competitors. But 
the actual tillers of the soil who have got rich are few. What then 
has been the inducement to so many to despoil the land on 
which they depend for a living, and to despoil it within the 
last century or so to a hitherto unheard-of extent ? What 
has been the stimulus to the rapid extension of exhaustive 
farming all over the world ? 

" The stimulus has been a great development of the said 
possibilities of getting rich quickly, a development partly 
dependent on the evolution of new and powerful machines, 
and partly on a roughly simultaneous world-wide extension 
of a peculiar economic system, which has led to a vast accumula- 
tion of financial debt. Such debt, both internal and international, 
has grown to a point at which repayment is generally out of 
the question, and the payment of interest alone has become 
severely oppressive. The only way by which one can pay this 
interest is by producing or manufacturing and selling something 
with a view to making a money profit out of which to pay it. 
So purely financial considerations have everywhere acquired 
dominance over all others. . . International debt and soil 
erosion are twin brother and sister, inseparables. . .Rational- 
ization implies in the end merely an increase of speed. Its 
object is that the same number of men should produce more 
in a given time. In applying it we forget that life is a rhythmical 
process. ' The music of the spheres * is no mere poetic phrase. 
It is reflected in the life-processes of all creatures and of their 
associations, and not only so in such obvious physical 
phenomena as the seasons, the tides, the alternations of night 
and day, the beating of the heart, or the finer vibrations 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human Life 45 

studied by physicists. The harmonious rhythms of life are 
thrown into discord by the inexorable urge to speed and ever 
more speed which is the inevitable accompaniment of a way 
of life dominated by the mathematical fiction which we know 
as money. . . There is another complication. It is the fact 
that our economic and financial system has an inherent instab- 
ility. For hundreds of years farm prices have fluctuated 
wildly. Short booms have been followed by long slumps. . . 
Instability of prices, when it goes beyond a certain point, 
takes away whatever chance the farmer might have of coping 
with the competition with which he is faced. For the farmer's 
main job is the steady building up of the fertility of the soil ; 
a job quite incompatible with constant changes of policy, 
forced upon him by changes in the price situation. 

" Under present conditions the only thing that pays is 
quick profit-making while the going is good. By ignorant cr 
unscrupulous exploitation and exhaustion of fertility vast 
profits have been made (by financiers rather than farmers) 
in the name of cheap food. The pace is forced for the sound 
farmer wherever he lives. The time factor becomes ever 
more and more important, as everyone has to snatch at the 
chances of the moment to catch up with the accumulation 
of debt, and achieve a quick turn-over to minimize overhead 
costs per unit of production. If what has been said about the 
state of farming in the world is true, there is no need to dwell 
at length on the importance to mankind of a relaxation of the 
inexorable urge to speed under which both man and the land 
on which he lives are exhausted. As is usual nowadays, it will 
be left for future generations to pay for our mistakes, but they 
may not have the wherewithal. Money alone is notoriously 
useless in a desert." 1 

" In country after country," writes the Earl of Portsmouth in 
his fine book, Alternative to Death, " the farmer's indebted- 
ness is greater than his capital assets. . . Thus in Australia, 
for instance, the average debt of each farmer is more than the 
capital value of his entire assets in land and stock. The farmer 
must therefore go bankrupt or continue to pay interest with 
the produce of his land on a capital sum greater than the value 
of his holding. To do that he is forced either to over-graze 
his land in order to sell more sheep and wool, or to grow wheat, 
which exhausts his land, when he should be growing fertility 
crops such as clover. 

1 Look to the Land is published by Dent and Sons. It is a very remarkable 
study of the disastrous effects of the monetary system on farming, food, &c. 



46 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

" The result of this is threefold. First, his own land become 
exhausted and each further step he takes towards repaymen 
of his debt or interest makes the exhaustion greater. Second 
by exhausting his own land he is altering the climate, creating 
drought and erosion, so that if his neighbours are in a like 
condition as himself, the desert steps in. Third, as if to make 
quite sure that there is no hope of averting the victory of the 
desert, he is forced to overcrowd the export market by selling 
the produce, which is really the capital of his soil, in competition 
with his neighbours who are likewise impoverished. Thus 
prices fall and the farmer cannot purchase the produce of 
industry which then works at half time and half employment. 
The same type of example could be written of any part of the 
world except places like the Hunza Valley, where men live 
with and by the soil, returning everything to it, and know no 
debt. In other words, it applies practically to the whole of the 
so-called civilized world where the present machinery for 
finance and distribution exists. . . 

" Although civilization rests on the soil, civilization as we 
know it is complicated. For the lubrication of its machinery it 
requires a steady and constant flow of money as the medium 
of exchange. Therefore, unless there is proper functioning of 
money, it will be impossible for modern civilization to 
continue without the parts seizing. This has in fact happened. 
The first and greatest victim is the soil." 1 

The exhaustion of the soil has deleterious effects on the 
crops grown thereon, which in their turn lead to ill-health 
and inability to resist disease in the animals and human beings 
that feed on them. " The flooding of the English market 
with cheap food, grown anywhere and anyhow," writes 
Sir Albert Howard in An Agricultural Testament, " forced 
farmers of this country (England) to throw to the winds the 
old and well-tried principles of mixed farming, and to save 
themselves from bankruptcy by reducing the cost of production. 
But this temporary salvation was paid for by loss of fertility. 
Mother earth has recorded her disapproval by the steady 
growth of disease in crops, animals and mankind. The spraying 
machine was called in to protect the plant ; vaccines and 
serums the animals ; in the last resort the afflicted live stock are 
slaughtered and burnt. This policy is failing before our eyes. 
The population, fed on improperly grown food, has to be 
bolstered up by an expensive system of patent medicines, 

1 Alternative to Death is published by Faber and Faber, Ltd. 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human Life 47 

panel doctors, dispensaries, hospitals, and convalescent homes. 
A C3 population is being created. . . The prophet is always 
at the mercy of events ; nevertheless, I venture to conclude 
this book with the forecast that at least half the illnesses of 
mankind will disappear once our food supplies are raised from 
fertile soil and consumed in a fresh condition." 1 

One more quotation concerning the disastrous effects of 
soil-exhaustion will be given, because of the great authority 
of the writer. Brig. Gen. Sir Robert McCarrison, Director of 
Nutrition Research in India, writes : "If they (foodstuffs) 
be produced on impoverished soils, their quality will be poor 
and the health of those who eat them, man and his domestic 
animals, will suffer accordingly." a 

The situation in the world in general may be well summed 
up in the words of Edmund Blunden in Return to Husbandry : 
" In all continents," we read, " the desert is advancing, 
smothering the fertile plains and valleys with drifting sands. . . . 
Civilization has brought us to a pass of mechanized savagery 
which nothing will cure perhaps except famine and disease. 
And it is famine and disease which threaten the future which 
our young people will call their time." 3 

Perhaps what has been written in this section may help 
people to understand in some degree why farmers, the producers 
of primary necessities, are everywhere complaining, and why 
reafforestation in Ireland is not popular financially. The 
slower rhythm of agriculture and forestry, so favourable to 
normal human life, is not beloved of those whose chief pre- 
occupation is interest on debt. It is to be hoped that, having 
discovered why, people will strive to do all they can to remedy 
the state of affairs, instead of treating the complaints of the 
farming community as a matter for jesting. 

BREAD 

We shall begin by quoting a few extracts from Bread in 
Peace and in War, a splendid pamphlet published in October, 
1940, by the Food Education Society of England. In this 
excellent work, the facts of the case are outlined as follows : 
" It has been well known for years that civilized diet is deficient 

1 An Agricultural Testament is published by the Oxford University 
Press . 

2 Quoted by K. E. Barlow in The Discipline of Peace (Faber and Faber), 
p. 127. 

3 Return to Husbandry is published by J. M. Dent and Sons, Ltd. 



48 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

in both vitamins and mineral salts. For centuries two of the 
most important foods of the world have been wheat and rice. 
Before 1850 these grains were pounded by hand or coarsely 
stoneground, and little of the bran was lost, while the valuable 
vitamin B was retained. The introduction of steel rolls for 
milling enabled the miller to produce finer flour while the 
bran and so on were sieved off. These sievings contain the 
germ of the wheat (or rice) and incidentally the vitamin B 
and the mineral salts. The flour from the modern treatment 
is whiter, and the public, mistakenly thinking that whiteness 
means purity and goodness, demands the whitest possible 
flour. To obtain this the modern miller bleaches his flour 
with chemicals. The result of these operations is to produce 
a devitalised white powder which we make into bread, but it 
is no longer the ' staff of life.' The sievings, which contain the 
most valuable part of the wheat, are made into foodstuffs for 
poultry or other live stock. , . Very powerful commercial 
interests, including a whole group of advertised cereal goods, 
drugs, preparations, etc., have been built up upon the circum- 
stances that the milling trade has been ready and able to supply 
the raw materials of these traders in the form of the so-called 
* offal ' of flour, which * offal * was, previous to 1880 
(introduction of roller-milling), included in the daily food of the 
people and is now extracted from it. . . The attention of the 
Minister of Food is called to a legal anomaly, now much 
discussed, and likely to excite feeling when it is more generally 
appreciated, viz., the dairyman or milk supplier who extracts 
cream from his milk (beyond a certain percentage) is visited 
with the most severe penalties ; the miller who extracts the 
equivalent of cream from his flour goes scot free." 

A few passages from another excellent pamphlet, Our 
Daily Bread, by Prof. Joseph Reilly of University College, 
Cork, may be quoted in confirmation of what we have just 
said. " The trend of development in the treatment of cereals 
for human use is not in line with progress in the science of 
nutrition, but rather in the opposite direction. This applies 
especially to wheat as used by man in the form of the white 
loaf. The aim for a long time was to provide a product pleasant 
in appearance, irrespective of the loss of the finer nutritive 
constituents. The actual nature of the loaf has changed within 
the last three or four decades. 

" I would like to emphasise this fact that the public should 
not confuse the present high extraction flour (even 95 per cent, 
extraction) with wholemeal flour. What I mean by wholemeal 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human Life 49 

flour is whole grain, stone-milled flour containing the germ 
of the wheat as well as all the other constituents of the wheat- 
berry. . . Even the roller-milled flour is often bleached 
still whiter by irritants or oxidized by so-called chemical 
improvers. Chemicals such as nitrosylchloride, chlorine, 
nitric acid, benzoyl peroxide or certain persulphates are also 
used. . . Nitrogen trichloride has largely displaced other 
chemicals in the bleaching of flour. About 90 per cent, of the 
flour mills in North America and 85 per cent, of the flour 
mills in England employ this reagent. An extremely white 
product results. It is claimed that this treatment, even though 
it increases cost, alters the gluten and gives the baker a more 
stable and stiffer dough so that on treatment with yeast a 
' better * loaf results which will absorb more water — hence 
more loaves per sack of flour." 1 

In spite of these undeniable facts, the struggle to secure 
good bread for the people, especially for the poor, will be 
exceedingly difficult. The big mills with their large output 
" pay " better than the other type which turned out better 
flour. The pamphlet, Bread in Peace and War, continues : 
" To-day (in regard to this struggle) we have to contend with 
a more powerful opposition (than in 1917) because the flour- 
milling industry is in the hands of so few Arms. This is a 
great danger. In 1930 when Mr. Hurst wrote his brochure 
on The Bread of Britain, the Co-operative Wholesale Society 
milled 22 per cent, of the flour, Banks 20 per cent., Spillers 
20 per cent, and independent firms 32 per cent. Hurst said 
that it would not be long before 80 per cent, was controlled. 
Now 90 per cent, is controlled by the three. Powerful interests 
such as these are never going to release their hold so long as 
they can persuade the public that white flour is the right 
stuff. . . What are the circumstances which explain the 
resistance to the provision of a wholemeal bread ? May they 
not be found in the fact that the entire industry of flour- 
milling in this country is now for practical purposes concentrated 
in one gigantic combination which approximates to the position 
of a single trust, inasmuch as two private and interrelated 
firms, with the Co-operative Wholesale Society as their sole 
rival, control the whole production of flour ? Any departure 
from existing practice must mean a serious disturbance of 
invested capital amounting at this time probably to something 
like 20 million sterling, and the loss to the companies concerned 

1 Our Daily Bread is published by The Forum Press, Cork. 



50 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

of the highly profitable by-products of milling white flour. . . 
Mr. John Burns, President, Local Government Board, 
announced that a bill was in preparation to secure the purity 
of flour and to render illegal the use of phosphates and bleaching, 
July 23, 191 2. The same Minister stated that a bill dealing 
with the whole question of the purity of food, including 
flour, was in preparation, March 26, 191 3. Neither measure, 
however, saw the light. . ." 

" In a democracy," writes Mr. Kenny Williamson in the 
Monthly Bulletin of the Economic Reform Club, July, 1941, 
" free speech is permitted. You can say what you think, 
within limits, the limits imposed by the Money Power. I have 
done a little broadcasting ; but could I say what I thought, 
what I believed ? Of course not. In 1938 I wrote a script that 
experiments at Cambridge, upon rats fed exclusively on white 
bread, had resulted in the rats dying of various diseases (all 
due to malnutrition) within three months. I was not allowed 
to say this, however. Nor was I permitted to extol the virtues 
of wholemeal bread. I was not allowed to explode the old lie 
that British wheat was unfit for making into wholemeal flour. 
The Money Power had mills at the ports and its machinery 
was designed for skimming the nutritious golden skin of the 
harder foreign wheat-berry, in order to produce snow-white 
flour, and also to supply the feeding-stuffs trade with ' offals ' 
as the skins or rinds are called. If everyone hearing my talk, 
made sudden demand for wheatmeal bread, millions of pounds 
worth of machinery would have to be scrapped. Sixteen million 
people might be permanently under-nourished but sixteen 
million pounds must not be lost ! . . . Nothing likely to injure 
the Money Power was permitted. . . Be a good boy and 
prophesy unto them smooth things, or else you won't be able 
to give any more talks over the air of the B.B.C. Sixteen 
millions permanently under-nourished ? We are afraid it has 
nothing to do with us. Privately, of course, we agree with you, 
but orders are orders. 

" It was the same in newspaper articles : nothing must be 
printed which might cause a falling-off of advertising revenue. 
In one group of newspapers the Jolly Millers spent over 
forty thousand pounds in advertising, so nothing depreciating 
white flour must appear in the paper. Won't you write another 
article instead about the otter ? Say just what you like. They 
live in water, don't they, in rivers and swamps ?. . . The 
Money Power cares nothing for human life, nothing for the 
soil that is the mother of human life. How long will men 



The Effects of the Gold Standard System on Human Life 51 

continue to respect the old system which is based on the 
Money Power ? For the system not only ruins the soil and 
despoils human life, but periodically it becomes locked in a 
deadly struggle with its rivals." 

Bread is not the only food of which the quality has deter- 
iorated as a result of man's reversal of the natural order. 
" The fanner's produce is no longer conveyed to the local 
market," writes Arthur Rogers, " by the most economic form 
of transport for this purpose, which is still a horse-drawn 
cart. This has led to a great reduction in the supply of one of 
the most valuable of natural and living fertilizers, which has 
been replaced by combine-produced dead chemical de-fertil- 
izers. . . The under-nourishment which is a justifiable 
cause for concern is due to the quality, rather than to the 
quantity, of the food eaten by our town- dwellers. The most 
nourishing food is fresh, natural food which has been produced 
on living soil. Food . . . consumed in our cities is mostly 
stale, denatured food, produced on chemically deadened 
and denatured soil. This is the major cause of declining 
fertility . . . while the denatured condition of the soil is also 
one of the chief reasons for foot-and-mouth disease. . . . 
Milk is robbed of its vitality by pasteurisation, which can.be 
undertaken only by the big milk combines and which, if 
enforced, must tend to squeeze out great numbers of inde- 
pendent producers and retailers. Before wheat is used for 
bread-making its germ is taken out alive. Only now under 
stress of war conditions, is it put back dead. The extracted 
wheat germ is sold at about ten times the price of flour. These 
processes are inspired by big-business. . . Big-business 
influences are the chief cause of the widespread under- 
nourishment." 1 And big-business is the interest slave of 
finance, to use Viscount Lymington's expression when speaking 
of the farmers of the Middle West. 3 

1 Our Peace Crisis, pp. 66, 67 (The Sterling Press, 38, Bedford Street, 
London, W.C.2). For a corroborative testimony, cf. Look, to the Land, 
by Lord Northbourne, pp. 68-74. 

2 Famine in England, p. 94. On the same page, Viscount Lymington 
sums up the situation in the United States as follows : " There is no 
democracy, but only three main classes in the western world to-day : 
the wage-slave, the interest-slave, and the plutocrat." 



CHAPTER VII 

USURY 

In the examination of this question, we must keep well before 
our minds the text of Pope Leo XIII in the Encyclical Letter, 
Rerum Novarum (1891), where he insists upon the existence of 
usury in our day, though under a different guise from that of 
ancient times. After having pointed out that the abolition 
of the Guilds and the free rein given to unbridled competition 
had opened the way to the subjection of the labouring poor 
to a small number of wealthy men, he adds : " The evil has 
been increased by rapacious usury which though more than 
once condemned by the Church, is, nevertheless, under a 
different guise, but with like injustice, still practised by 
covetous and grasping men." It must be emphasized that the 
Pope used the present tense to indicate that he is affirming 
the existence of usury at the time of writing. He then goes on 
to point out that the evil in question, namely, the growth of a 
vast propertyless proletariat in subjection to a few rich men, 
has been still further augmented by the uprise of powerful 
monopolies controlling enterprises and raw materials. Usury, 
therefore, according to Pope Leo XIII, not only exists in our 
times, but it has played an enormous part in depriving the 
masses of property and concentrating it in the hands of a few. 
Of course, in regard to this particular point, I am only giving 
as probable the explanation set out below. As Father 
McLaughlin, O.S.B., says in an able article, Usury Sub Judice, 
in The Clergy Review (January 1935) : " The problem of 
usury is still undecided and has been for centuries. The Church 
will not decide it until discussion among theologians has been 
deep enough and accurate enough to lay bare the dividing 
line between ' that fruit which is drawn from money by just 
right and therefore can be kept both in law and in conscience ; 
and that other fruit which is drawn from money wrongly, 
and therefore must be adjudged to be repaid, both by law and 
by conscience ' (Pope Benedict XIV, Ency. Letter, Vix 
Pervenit)" 

Many writers hold with Father Lamarche, O.P., in La 

53 



Usury $2 

Justice et le PrSt d InterSt, that " modern lending is so constituted 
that always and everywhere it is accompanied by extrinsic 
titles justifying interest." Accordingly, they maintain that 
usury, except in the sense of exorbitant interest, does not 
exist, because extrinsic titles justifying a certain rate of interest 
are always present. For these writers, 'however, money as a 
fungible thing, has an existence independent of the lender 
and the borrower. " A fungible thing," writes Father Lewis 
Watt, S.J., in The Ethics of Interest, " is one which perishes 
in the act of serving its natural purpose. . . The natural 
and normal use of a loaf of bread, for instance, is to be eaten. . . 
The loaf is a fungible thing." The money of which these 
writers speak, therefore, exists prior to being lent. A loan 
for them is the transfer of a pre-existing claim for goods and 
services which the lender has acquired. The lendes gives up 
something. But when bankers grant loans, they bring exchange- 
medium into existence, they create money. They are not 
simply lending exchange-medium having an existence indepen- 
dent of them and of the borrowers. " Borrowing," writes 
Prof. O'Rahilly in Money, " covers (i) the transfer of pre- 
existing claims legitimately earned by the holders ; (z) the 
creation of new money-claims. . . The Government does not 
and cannot borrow pre-existing money from the banks : 
all it can do is to pay them for creating new money." As 
Professor Soddy insists, the banks do not give up anything 
at all. 

Accordingly, other writers point out that four out of the 
five extrinsic titles, namely, lucrum cessans (gain given up), 
damnum emergens (resulting loss), periculum sortis (risk) and 
poena conventionale (liability to a forfeit), properly apply only 
where the lender of money gives up already existing money 
created independently of him, which by his industry he has 
succeeded in acquiring. Professor Soddy states this in his 
usual clear style : " The evils of genuine usury in the Middle 
Ages," he writes, " through the shortage of the precious 
metals and the insufficiency of the medium of exchange, 
cried aloud to heaven for redress. But the genuine usurer did 
at least give up what he lent and that for which he received 
interest, whereas the banker does not. . . It is bad enough 
to be in the grip of the money-lender who does lend his money, 
but it is a million times worse to be in the grip of the pretended 
money-lender who does not lend his own money but creates 
it to lend and destroys the means of repayment just as fast 
as the debtors succeed in repaying it." Sir Reginald Rowe 



54 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

implicitly makes the same assertion, namely, that exchange- 
medium is created and cancelled in the manner best calculated 
to make profit for the creators. " It is the large variations 
in the rate of interest," he writes, " brought about in the past 
by the international scramble for gold, which seems to me 
largely responsible for present-day evils, including a world 
continually at war. Internally they are the machinery of 
alternate inflations and deflations, an alternation which hits 
everybody except the dealers in money who profit on balance 
either way. Thereby the trader, whether merchant or manu- 
facturer, is hurt on balance, and all wage-earners, a vast 
majority of the community, suffer excessively." 

Of course, Professor Soddy and Sir Reginald Rowe and all 
the writers on modern money admit that the banks are 
allowed to make a service-charge for the creation of exchange- 
medium and that in this way there is a valid title to a certain 
percentage for bank-loans. This is the equivalent of Lex 
civilis or the title of civil law, of which theologians speak. 
As the function is a public service it can be conceded that the 
banks have a right to a reasonable remuneration, but as 
Professor O'Rahilly points out, the term interest cannot 
properly be applied to bank-charges for the issue of bank- 
money. 

Accordingly, a moderate service-charge is justified. But are 
the banks content with this ? Sir Reginald Rowe expresses 
the attitude of mind of the growing body of students of the 
banking system on this point, when he writes : " New econom- 
ists are not prepared to admit that banking could not be worked 
much more cheaply, but even if banking administration 
cost no less, they think it fatally wrong that the creation and 
destruction of money should be left to private concerns owned 
by shareholders. The banks publish balance-sheets, but no 
profit-and-loss accounts. Their operations are largely kept 
secret, their balance-sheets leave much unrevealed. They can 
always through their power in the manufacture of credit 
arrange to pay a 15 per cent, dividend (which seems to be about 
the figure which their directorates judge will not alarm the 
public), or any large dividend within reasonable limits." 
It is interesting to note that State-created money, for example, 
silver and copper coins, circulates without interest being paid 
on it, while bank-created money enables a dividend of 15 
per cent, to be paid on its circulation. Though a moderate 
rate of interest on the creation of money can be justified as a 
service-charge, yet all Catholic writers agree that an excessive 



Usury 55 

rate of interest is usurious. This, however, can hardly be what 
Pope Leo XIII meant when he said that usury had come back 
under another guise, for it is an old form of usury. 

It seems fairly obvious that the manner in which usury 
has come back in modern times under another form is by 
the arbitrary changes made in the volume of exchange-medium 
by those who are in chief control of the monetary system. 
The argument must be understood to be exclusively against 
" the financial leaders who direct its major operations," to 
use Sir Reginald Rowe's words. The deflation after the Great 
War (1914-18), which told so hardly on Irish farmers, was 
certainly not the working-out of an inexorable law of nature 
like a drought in Australia. Money is manipulated by human 
intelligences and wills responsible for the " scarcity of money " 
spoken of by Pope Pius XI in the Encyclical Letter, On the 
Troubles of Our Time. 

" It is the big financiers, the dealers in big money," writes 
Sir Reginald Rowe in The Root of All Evil, " who control 
the machine by directing the movements of credit ; and this 
gives them immense power over the rest of us. . . . Those 
in chief control of money are comparatively few, but the 
army they command is large, since it contains all those whose 
livelihood is associated with the movements of money. I 
think thai; many of the leaders, if not all, understand the 
problem perfectly well, but keep It as far as possible from their 
own consideration as well as from that of others. ... Of the 
rank and file (of the monetary army), probably not one in a 
hundred understands the problem at all. Books are written 
about it, which they do not read, and it is hardly ever men- 
tioned in the Press. ... I think many of them are beginning 
to doubt if it (the present system) is satisfactory. . . . The 
Press is hugely capitalized, must pay interest on its capital, 
and has to finance itself on the large scale which is so dear 
to the heart of the money power. In the present state of 
public ignorance no important newspaper dare affront and 
challenge the money power for fear of the consequences. Our 
credit-makers, the banks, serving in their turn 'big money,' 
could easily, by a twist of the credit-screw, check any such 
revolt." 

Arbitrary changes in the volume of money or exchange- 
medium cause prices to rise and fall. Thus the power to 
change the volume of the exchange-medium is the power to 
change the terms of every contract involving future money 
payments. The amount of currency or exchange is increased 



56 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

if the aggregate of loans granted is greater than the aggregate 
of loans paid back or called in, as happens in periods of credit 
expansion. The amount of currency is decreased if the aggre- 
gate of loans granted is less than the aggregate of loans called 
in or paid back, as happens in periods of credit contraction. 
One party to the loan-contract, the Central Bank in control 
of the issue of credit-money, thus retains the power to alter the 
value of the currency as a measure of things saleable. This 
is the same as if a man sells a- horse to another, and at the same 
time retains the power to change the animal into a mule or 
a donkey in a fortnight or whenever it suits him. The yard 
measure or the pound avoirdupois is not alterable in this way 
at the will of a buyer or a seller. One of the contracting parties, 
the Central Bank, plays the accordion with the exchange- 
medium and can thus double the 5 per cent. There can be 
no question of extrinsic titles in this case. It is purely and 
simply usury under another guise, that is, a charge made 
for the transfer of exchange-medium on no other ground 
than that of the fact of transferring its ownership. 

In his recently published work, Interest and Usury, the Rev. 
Bernard Dempsey, S.J., seems to hold this. 1 He writes : 
" Deflation did not present itself to them (the Scholastics) as 
an acute problem. ... If the loans and created funds were 
all in the hands of one man, the Scholastics would not approve 
of that one man calling all the loans simultaneously, inducing 
distress selling and an avalanche of pseudo-costs with resultant 
lower values, and then buying in the assets. That, too, would 
be gain from a loan ; and to make one's own price by calling 
a loan would be no less reprehensible than charging a higher 
price for a good which the seller financed by a loan involving 
no emergent loss. Though the Schoolmen were not confronted 
with the problem, we may well believe that they would have 
condemned such a practice as heartily as they would condemn the 
depreciation of money by sending pseudo-income to market." 
This is the point made by Mr. Arthur Kitson in A Fraudu- 
lent Standard, published in 191 7, where he speaks of the plans 
of the great banking and financial companies that had invested 
large sums in War Loans, by a mere stroke of the pen, to double 
the weight of the War Debt. They were planning to do this, 
he said, by returning to the Gold Standard and thus altering 
the value of the pounds in which the debt had been contracted. 
" Similarly," he adds, " although the nominal rate of interest 

1 Interest and Usury is published by the American Council on Public 
Affairs, Washington. 



Usury 57 

s 5 per cent., by this method of tampering with the value 
of the pound, these investors will actually receive 10 per cent, 
on their original investment." 1 The return to the Gold Stand- 
ard took place in 1925 and the taxpayers had to sell two sheep 
instead of one, in order to pay the interest, though the nominal 
figures of the debt and of the interest were not changed. 
This certainly seems to be usurious, and it accompanies all 
the " booms " and " slumps " or inflations and deflations 
that are part of the normal functioning of the Gold Standard. 
The consequences of declining prices are business failures, 
unemployment and wholesale foreclosures with inevitable 
increasing financial control. " Inflation," as Mr. Jeffrey 
Mark expresses it in The Modern Idolatry, " is the web of 
the financial spider, and deflation the mastication of the 
human fly." 

In order not to be unfair to those who control the monetary 
system, I should like to quote a passage from the Earl of 
Portsmouth's splendid book, Alternative to Death. The noble 
writer distinguishes between the controllers and the system 
as follows : " Probably no country in the world has such able 
or upright controllers of its banking system as we have. One 
of the very reasons why the devil has never been sufficiently 
visible to provoke revolt is the fact that some of the most 
honest of men have devoted their lives in all sincerity to the 
elaboration of this nevertheless dishonest system. Because 
they have rarely been over-greedy, they have worked the 
system sufficiently well to mask our decline to the servile state 
by imperceptible stages. . . . The great joint stock banks 
have a probity over detail which is almost medieval in its 
honesty. But while they continue to work such a system, 
based upon power without responsibility and profit without 
production, misery and degradation have walked at the head 
of the procession of modern progress"." 2 

1 " In his 1924 address, referring to the intended return to the Gold 
Standard, Mr. McKenna stated that the national debt ' stands to-day at 
£7,700 millions, mostly borrowed when money was wo&th very much less 
than before the war. With prices back to their former level, the true burden 
of the debt will be more than doubled. . . the creditor will receive a huge 
premium at the expense of the debtor ' " (Article on the Bank of England in 
The Weekly Review, Sept. 26th, 1940). 

a Christopher Hollis is more cynical. " The individual gentleman," 
he writes, " would ... be unwilling to ' do anything that would let down 
the school,' or the regiment, or what not. But, if you could trick the whole 
school into connivance at injustice, then, on the gentleman's code, it would 
become disloyalty to question the conduct of the school. So Shylock 
exchanged the Jewish gaberdine for the Old School Tie and was elected 
with acclamation to the governing body" {The Two Nations, p. 50). 



58 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

The English Monetary System and Ireland 

Under the present monetary system we in Ireland are 
suffering from the same evils as the people of* England, but 
in an accentuated fashion. We have the same monetary system, 
but, if I may use a popular expression, we are the tail of the 
dog. If the head and body of the dog are getting badly hit 
and are growling, the tail is getting a still worse deal and has 
far more reason to complain. " We must not be misled by 
current phraseology," writes Professor O'Rahilly in Money 
(p. 394), " into thinking that we have at present a separate 
currency which happens to be kept at parity with British 
currency. What we have is not parity but identity subject 
to separate book-entry." This identity was disastrous for our 
farmers, when the Bank of England, as we have seen, entered 
upon its deflationary process after the Great War. The 
nominal 5 per cent, on their bank-loans became in reality 
10 per cent, owing to the decrease in the quantity of exchange- 
medium, so they had to sell two animals instead of one, in 
order to pay their interest. The consequences during the 
present war (1939-?), are also very sad. Owing to the fact 
that " our Currency Commission or Central Bank may and 
must issue currency for internal purposes only if and when 
sterling is surrendered to them," 1 those who have a bullock 
or other animal to sell can secure English money and so 
obtain Irish exchange-medium, but those who have only 
their labour to sell must go to England, where new English 
exchange-medium is issued, in order to obtain it. Now it 
would take a long time to imbue most Irish men and women 
with Communistic ideas in Irish surroundings, but in non- 
Catholic surroundings, with a paper like Irish Freedom giving 
them the Communistic viewpoint on Irish affairs and world 
events, the situation is different. The morally inevitable 
consequences of the migration — and return — fit in well with 
the plans of the organized anti-supernatural forces in the 
world for the attack on the Supernatural Life of our country. 
I have dealt with this last matter briefly in my pamphlet, 
The Worhingmen y s Guilds of the Middle Ages. Professor 
O'Rahilly has frequently pointed out in The Standard that our 
Central Bank is powerless to control our price-level. 

In the May (1944) issue of Irish Freedom the confiscation 
of Church property and the denial of the right of acquiring 

1 Professor O'fUhilly in The Standard, 9th Oct., 1942. 



Usury 59 

property by inheritance were lauded as " sound, democratic 
principles." We need to bear in mind that revolutions against 
the Catholic Church and the Mass are not spontaneous up- 
risings of the people. They are movements prepared a long 
time in advance by the forces organized against our Divine 
Lord and the Supernatural Life of Grace. 1 The art of revolu- 
tion is that by which a small but well-organized minority 
compels an unwilling but unorganized majority to submit to 
the overthrow of the State. The method is the same to-day 
as it was in 1789-1793, namely, the creation of a revolutionary 
atmosphere by the exploitation of existing grievances. 8 There 
is a grievance ready to hand in our country in the failure of 
our successive native governments to deal with unemployment 
and emigration. Every effort will be made to canalize the 
discontent of the poor with this failure into revolt against 
religion and private property. It will be proclaimed loudly 
that only by a Communist revolution can the full fruits of 
the Irish Rising of 1916 be reaped. It will be insisted that 
unemployment and emigration prove that the " masses " who 
made possible the success of the Rising have been betrayed. 
The functioning of the monetary system in Ireland has certainly 
contributed towards the growth of the conditions Communists 
desire to see, in view of their anti-supernatural designs. 

In The Two Nations (p. 200), when speaking of the American 
War of Independence, Christopher Hollis makes the remark 
that, after a successful revolution, there is usually a second 
struggle to decide whether the independence is to be true 
independence or " whether the financial system will re- 
establish over the new government the same control it had 
exercised over the old." We in Ireland must bear in mind 
that the world-wide struggle to bring those skilled in the 
manipulation of exchange-medium into the place in States 
to which the hierarchical position of their art entitles them is 
part of the wider struggle for the integral return to the Divine 
Plan for order in the world. 

1 Cf . The Kingship of Christ and Organized Naturalism, The Mystical 
Body of Christ and the Reorganisation of Society and The Mystical Body 
of Christ in the Modern World. 

2 Cf . The Mystical Body of Cftrist and the Reorganization of Society, 
Chapter V. 



CHAPTER VIII 
OUTLINE OF PRINCIPLES OF MONETARY REFORM 

In an excellent pamphlet, entitled The Arch-Enemy of 
Economic Freedom"*- Professor Soddy, one of the signatories 
to the Letter quoted in Chapter I, deals succinctly with the 
evils of the present monetary system and explains the points 
put before His Grace, the Apostolic Delegate to Great Britain, 
and the non-Catholic dignitaries. The outline of reform set 
forth in this pamphlet may be summed up in the author s 
own words in another of his books : " As regards transition 
stages, fix a price-index on the cost of the more important 
expenses of an average middle-class householder, require the 
banks always to keep pound for pound of national money 
against their current accounts drawable by cheque, set up a 
national advisory statistical bureau on an independent scien- 
tific basis [to see to the stability of the price-level], and re- 
constitute the mint for the issue of all money. Avoid as the 
plague schemes for nationalizing banks. The object is to 
stop private minting and nationalize money itself." 2 These 
points will be amplified in the following paragraphs. 3 : 

National Monetary Reform 
(a) — Abandonment of the Domestic Gold Standard 

From what we have seen of the functioning of the Domestic 
Gold Standard, it will be evident that it is opposed to the 
Common Good to have the volume of exchange-medium in 
a country proportioned, not to the actualization of the country's 
potential productivity, but to the amount of gold that may 
happen to be in the country. " The aura of security that still 
hangs about gold," writes Mr. Geoffrey Crowther, " is, in 
fact, the only remaining sound or semi-sound argument left 
for the Domestic Gold Standard. In France and America 
there would probably be anxious distrust in the national 

1 The pamphlet can be obtained from the author at Knapp, Ens tone, 
Oxon., England, is. lid. post free. 

* The R6le of Money, p. an . 

'These paragraphs form a portion of Chapter XXI of The Mystical 
Body of Christ and the Reorganization of Society. 

60 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 61 

currencies, if they were not known to be * backed by golfL* 
In England we already have a more rational approach. As 
has already been pointed out, the gold backing of the Bank 
of England's notes has been reduced virtually to nothing, 
and the whole gold reserve has been concentrated in the 
Exchange Equalization Account, where it is available for 
export, but not as currency backing. The ordinary man is 
probably not yet aware that this has happened, but after a 
few years it will be accepted by the public that money does 
not need either to be gold or to be backed by gold in order 
to be good money. When that time comes the Domestic Gold 
Standard will have died a natural death without its demise 
having done anybody any harm." 1 About this first point of 
reform there will be no difficulty. 

(b) — Issuing of Lawful Exchange-Medium by the State 

Great evils have resulted from the functioning of the Gold 
Standard and the control of the exchange-medium of countries 
by private individuals. To remedy these evils in a manner 
fully in accordance with the political and economic principles 
of St. Thomas, three points must be remembered. The 
first point of reform is that the creation or issuing of exchange- 
medium must be taken out of private hands. 8 The issuing 
of claims to goods and services valid and acceptable to all the 
citizens of a country is by right the prerogative of the authority 
exercising jurisdiction over the whole country. This is clearly 
seen by the fact that additional credit-money issued or loaned 
into existence, if it does not happen to coincide with a pro- 
portional increase of goods for sale, " will raise prices and 
make the value of everybody's money in the country worth 
less in goods, so repudiating part of the nation's debt in goods 
and services to the owners of money." 8 To put this another 

1 An Outline of Money, p. 333. 

8 The three points, which will be developed under (b), (c) and {d), are 
taken from Money Creators (ChaptersXII and XVII), by Miss G. M. Coogan. 
In his Foreword to this book, Mr. Robert L. Owen says that " it contains 
scientific truths — not quackery." Mr. Owen is a former Chairman of the 
Banking and Currency Committee of the United States Senate. 

8 The R6le of Money* by Professor Soddy {p. 91). The private creators 
of exchange -medium are not concerned about the alterations of the price- 
level. Their preoccupation is with interest on money. " Professor Soddy 
is very insistent that , . . the banks by the issue of new money to themseves 
or their borrowers actually enforce a direct levy in kind on the wealth-on- 
sale of the community (i.e. on all there is for sale). . . Anyone can see that 
this is the case when a counterfeit note is put in circulation, but the forced 
levy on the wealth-on-sale is just the same whoever creates the new money " 
(The Root of AH Evil, by Sir Reginald Rowe, p. 52). 



62 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

way, whoever originates the exchange-medium must, by the 
very nature of money or exchange-medium, obtain something 
for nothing, that is, he must obtain the original purchasing- 
power throughout the State, at a trifling cost. Again, whoever 
has the power to issue the exchange-medium controls the 
volume of it. Arbitrary changes in the volume of money 
cause prices to rise or to fall. Whoever originates and controls 
the volume of money thus controls every single economic 
operation. If a private group exercises the power to originate 
the exchange-medium and then manipulates the volume of 
it, that group becomes a power greater than the government 
itself. It becomes a super-government, paralysing the efforts 
of the lawful government for the Common Good. It is per- 
fectly idle to talk about a Democracy or a Republic, when the 
sovereign power is really, being exercised by an individual 
super-group. 1 In his excellent book, Economic Tribulation, 
Mr. V. C. Vickers points out this truth and its consequences. 
" Through our own base carelessness and ignorance," he 
writes, " we have permitted the money industry, by the very 
virtue of its business, gradually to attain a political and 
economic influence so wide and powerful that it has actually 
undermined the authority of the State and usurped the power 
of democratic government. . . . This national and mainly 
international dictatorship of money, which plays off one country 
against another, and which, through the ownership of a large 
portion of the Press, converts the advertisement of its own 
private opinion into the semblance of general public opinion, 
cannot for much longer be permitted to render Democratic 
Government a mere nickname. . . . The finance industry, the 
exchange bankers and the Stock Exchange grow rich upon 
the ups and downs of Trade, and are largely dependent on 
variations and changes of the price-level of commodities. 
But productive industry grows rich upon stable markets, a 
constant price-level, and the absence of violent economic 
fluctuations. . . . Under such general conditions the Com- 
munist is naturally content to bide his time ; for he observes 
that the trend of affairs is slowly converging towards the very 
conditions he most desires to see — a growing discontent with 
finance and the money system, an increasing weariness of the 

1 " We have always maintained that the foreign policy of this country 
where it came into touch with exceptional expenditure upon international 
action— notably in connection with English armament .... depended upon 
the decision ... of the Bank of England supported by their financial 
allies beyond the Atlantic. . . They were certainly opposed to an adequate 
army" (The Weekly Review, Oct. 17th, 1940). 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 63 

present form of party government, and an increasing poverty 
and loss of influence among those who have so recently been 
the mainstay and backbone of their country." 1 

As nations have to struggle to maintain their national 
sovereignty against the international manipulators of money, 
the sovereign authority in the nation must take over the creation 
of the entire medium of exchange, consisting of the lawful, 
physical or tangible money of the country. Private individuals 
engaged in finance cannot be entrusted with the struggle to 
safeguard national sovereignty against " the deadly and 
detestable international Imperialism of money," to use the 
words of Pope Pius XI. 2 This is especially important since 
bankers in every country have already succumbed to its rule 
and are accustomed to look upon the trends favoured by it 
as indicative of the true line of progress for the world. They 
have hitherto conspicuously failed to practise the virtue of 
general or legal justice. 

Accordingly, the entire medium of exchange, consisting of 
the lawful money of each country \ should be paid into use by 
the Sovereign Power in the country. No private promises-to- 
pay should be allowed to circulate as legal tender but should 
be subjected to the penalties applying to counterfeit money. 
The money created and paid into use by the Sovere'gn Power 
should be non-interest bearing at tfi3 source and non- cancell- 
able, except by recalling it through taxation. It should not 
be brought into existence as a loan. The whole amount of 
new money issued should be paid into circulation to de "ray 
legitimate government expenses or to pay off existing govern- 
ment debt. The people, as a whole, would thus share the 
benefits and advantages involved in a change in the volume 
of money in existence in a nation. " By placing this first 
buying power in the hands of the government, the benefits 
fall to all the people, for by whatever amount the new money 
is issued, tax collections may be correspondingly reduced. 
This statement can be twisted into the thought that taxes 
can be abolished by merely issuing money ad infinitum. This 
is fallacious, for new money should be paid into use (circula- 

1 Economic Tribulation is published by John Lane, The Bodley Head, 
London. 

s The Pope's words in the Encyclical Letter, Quadragesimo Anno, are : 
" funestus et exsecrandus rei nummariae ' internationalismus ' seu ' imperial - 
ismus internationalls ' cui, ubi bene, ibi patria est." This " International 
Imperialism " will tend to eliminate all that is enshrined in the Catholic 
concept of " patria." This end coincides with that of Marx's dictum: 
" Workmen have no country." 



64 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

tion) only as the total stock of consumer goods — the things 
the people have produced and need in civilization — has been 
increased by expanded production." 1 Besides, it seems 
opposed to the dignity of human personality that the issuing 
of exchange-medium necessary for the Common Good should 
place some in the position of inferiority, as happens when 
money is loaned into existence. As we shall presently see, the 
Sovereign Power in the State should not engage in lending 
money. 

(c) — Lending of Lawful Exchange-Medium by Banking Guild 

The creation of exchange-medium, then, should be with- 
drawn from private individuals. It should be reserved to the 
National Government, but the lending of money should be 
completely divorced from money origination. This is the 
second point of monetary reform. The lending of the lawful 
money issued by the governmental monetary authority should 
not be carried out by the governmental monetary authority, 
but by privately-owned Corporations erected into a Guild 
and functioning under a Guild Charter. Let us take these 
two proposals in turn. 

" The most dangerous thing that could be done would be 
to place the merchandising of money in the hands of the 
National Government. Such a step would give the inter- 
nationalists their fnal weapon to destroy the property and 
personal rights of loyal citizens." 2 Government in the lending 
business is the essence of Socialism or Communism. For a 
government to create money as loans is even more vicious 
than for private banks to create money as loans ; for, in the 
case of private banks, arbitrary discrimination is not the 
primary motive in denying loans. No private business can 
long endure if the Government engages in the lending of 
money, even money created by itself, or determines what 
businesses may acquire savings from the people in return for 
part ownership. This seems to be a grave defect in the German 
banking system, even though the fallacy of making the volume 
of exchange-medium of a country depend on the amount of 
gold under the control of the government has been decisively 
shown up in that country. It is quite true that the volume of 
exchange-medium ought to be proportioned to the develop- 
ment of a country's productive capacity, not to the amount 

1 Money Creators, by Miss G. M. Coogan, p. 333. 
'Op. cit., p. 334. 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 65 

of gold in its Central Bank. But the German financial system 
as a whole, in conjunction with the race-theory, will tend to 
disregard human personality. The Reichsbank creates bank 
credit as loans to the German Government, and the German 
Government allows this new bank credit to reach the channels 
of trade by granting loans of it to whatever businesses it 
arbitrarily chooses. This means that the German Government 
is determining what businesses may or may not borrow. Such 
acts of a government allow it to aid the businesses it chooses 
via granting loans, and destroy those it chooses by denial of 
loans. This method destroys the individual person's right 
to the disposal of his own earnings and the inalienable right 
of the human person to own, use and control honestly acquired 
private property. As has already been remarked, the human 
being is thus in danger of becoming a mere individual at the 
mercy of the State. He is not being treated as a person. 1 

With regard to the second proposal, namely, that the lending 
of money should be carried out by privately-owned Corpora- 
tions, " each of the existing banks should be divided into 
two separate institutions or at least into departments of the 
original bank. The first set would be girobanks. 2 The Americans 
designate them ' check banks.' ' All banks carrying deposits 
subject to check would be required to treat these deposits 
as trust-funds of money held for the depositors. . . A full 
100 per cent, reserve has the status of a trust fund the real 
owners of which are the depositors.' 3 Thus bank deposits 
would once more become real deposits entrusted to the banker 
and withdrawable on demand. No interest would of course 

1 Miss Coogan wrote as follows in 1937 : " If the Government controls 
the lending of money, it can determine who may or who may not borrow 
money and hence can control every single business in the country. Control- 
ling every business means controlling every economic activity ; control of 
every economic activity gives power to control also the cultural and spiritual 
activities of the citizen. Lenin recommended Government origination 
and control of the medium for exchange. Unless the power to originate 
money is restricted to sovereignty and scientifically exercised, and lending 
is restricted exclusively to private, independent, State-chartered corporations, 
it is nothing short of childish prattle to talk about preventing the onrush 
of Socialism, Communism, or whatever name one "wants to use to designate 
an an ti -Christian State, in which all but the ' chosen few ' are hopeless 
slaves." 

8 A Girobank is a bank in which the money {coins or bullion in the early 
days) remains the property of the customers or members, thus being a 
depositum in the strict sense, the banker being a custodian or bailee. The 
owners can withdraw the money and the ownership of it can be transferred 
by written orders. Hence when the claims are circulated from one to another, 
they are said to make a giro (a circuit or turn) from hand to hand. 

* Irving Fisher, 100 per cent. Money, and Ed. (1936), 



66 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

be paid on them ; on the contrary, the depositors would 
have to pay the bank for its book-keeping service in arranging 
for transfers by cheque. . . In addition to girobanks there 
would be loan-banks, but not so limited in their scope, for 
lending or investing. How would these new savings-banks 
get money to lend ? From their own money (capital), from 
the money received from customers (savings accounts), from 
the money repaid on maturing loans. . . ' The only new 
limitation on bank loans would be a wholesome one, namely, 
that no money could be lent unless there was money to lend. 
That is, the banks could no longer overlend by manufacturing 
money out of thin air so as to cause inflation and a boom. . . 
Under the ioo per cent, system, banks would make loans 
just like anybody else, either out of their own savings or out of 
somebody else's, precisely as the early lending banks did before 
they were prevented by somebody's ' bright idea ' to lend 
other people's money while still letting those other people 
think that they had that money to use as money.' " x 

(d) Stability of Price Level 

To understand how the stability of the price-level is to be 
obtained, we must consider the method by which it is proposed 
to issue and lend lawful exchange -medium. Sir Reginald 
Rowe gives an excellent summary of Professor Soddy's 
proposals 2 for England as follows : " The huge balance of 
liabilities for cash which the banks have in fact no means 
of meeting should be met by the Nation by an equivalent 
issue of National money in the form of notes, and there should 
be no further creation or destruction of money by the banks. 
A national issue equal to the total of current bank deposits 
would be needed, say £2,000 million. The State would take 
over from the banks securities to this amount. Where these 
were collateral securities against loans, their owners could 
redeem them by repaying the loans. Where the State became 
the owner of Government securities, having paid for them with 
national notes, it could cancel these securities. Any other 
securities could be exchanged by market process for 
Government securities. The conclusion of the whole matter 
would be that the banks would hold money (physical money 
in the form of notes) to the exact value of their total current 
account deposits. It would be real money, a great part of which 

1 Op. cit., pp. 17, 92. The quotation from living Fisher is taken from 
Money, by Professor O'Rahilly, pp. 350-352. 

1 Contained in Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt, pp. 106-199. 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 67 

(i.c. all current account balances) they could not lend, but 
must hold in trust for its individual owners. [Money on 
time-deposit could be lent in the" fashion already explained 
above under (c)]. The banks could not create money to lend, 
as now. One obvious result would be that when £2,000 
million had been issued in new notes, that amount of national 
debt would have been cancelled. It should be emphasised 
that the issue of further new money would not be at the mercy 
of any Government, but in the hands of a statutory independent 
body, which would work scientifically on data readily obtained. 
Its economic thermometer would be price level, the main- 
tenance of average price level being its single aim when 
increasing or decreasing the supply of money." 1 

We can supplement the above succinct statements by 
quotations from Miss Coogan's Money Creators and A. N. 
Field's The Truth about New Zealand. According to the 
former, a statistical authority, called the U.S.A. Monetary 
Trustees, appointed by and directly responsible to the legitimate 
Government, should determine the rate at which lawful 
money should be issued or withdrawn, in order to maintain 
the price index of the main commodities constant at a level 
which would permit full employment. " The Monetary 
Trustees," she writes, " should maintain scientific records 
of prices — price indices which would reliably indicate at what 
levels the aggregate of raw commodities and aggregate finished 
goods are changing hands at any particular time. Once raw 
material price levels had reached a point wherein the nation's 
productive and business activity had absorbed its unemployed, 
and the price structure was high enough to afford sufficient 
national income to carry the legitimate private debt structure 
of the nation, that price level should be maintained. The 
fluctuations thereafter should be minor, because the flow of 
money would always be scientifically related to the actual 
quantity of physical consumer goods available for distribu- 
tion. . . In case it became necessary to curtail the volume of 
money, that could be done through taxation. . . Only a decrease 
in the volume of consumer goods, due to famine or disaster, 
would necessitate a decrease in the volume of money. . . 
If price levels are too low, too large a share of the products 
goes to satisfy those who own claims on the fixed assets and 
those engaged in actual production receive less than would 
enable them to consume the products of industry. After the 

1 The Root of All Evil, pp. 53, 54. 



68 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

desired price level is reached, money should be paid into the 
stream by the Monetary Trusteeship only as goods appear 
ready for distribution, which goods cannot be moved into 
consumption at the existing price levels without additional 
money. Given an adequate supply of money, the volume of 
goods distributable at a given price level would be limited 
only by the capacity of the nation to produce goods. The 
volume of goods produced would be limited only by the amount 
of natural resources, fixed capital, and the number of workers 
available. . . The result would be, not a fluctuating dollar 
as the deceivers shout, but a stable dollar as common sense 
proves. Stability means constant purchasing power of a dollar 
in terms of things people buy. . . The national Monetary 
Trustees would be required to file for publication, once a 
month, an intelligible and easily understood report, which 
would indicate exactly how much currency was outstanding 
as at that date. . . At any time currency was issued, the* exact 
amounts and exactly to whom and how issued would be made 
public information. There is no reason why such reports 
could not be simple and understandable to everyone." 1 

The Monetary Trustees should be exclusively full citizens 
of the country, should have an unblemished record for honesty 
and integrity and should have had no connexion with interna- 
tional banking, either as owners, partners, employees or 
advisers. They should receive adequate salaries, but should 
benefit in no way, whatsoever, except as citizens of the 
country, in the amount of money added to or withdrawn from 
the money stream. 2 

Mr. A. N. Field treats of stability of price level in connexion 
with the exchange rate with Great Britain. " Up to 1914," 
he writes, " our New Zealand pound was tied up very closely 
with the British sterling pound : one could always be obtained 
for the other with very small fluctuation in the rate of 
exchange. . . In August, 1914, the British pound became 
inconvertible paper and the New Zealand pound followed 
suit. The exchange rate remained pretty constant between 
the two until the slump set in. The banks then gradually let 
the rate widen to 10 per cent, and then in January, 1933, 
the Government put it up to 25 per cent. At this point it 
has since been held, except for one very slight reduction. 3 

1 Money Creators, pp. 251, 252. 2$\, 355. 33§- 
3 Money Creators, p. 250. 

1 For the advantages to New Zealand of the higher exchange ratd cf. 
Money, by Professor Alfred O'Rahilly, pp. 404-409, 423. 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 69 

The fixed exchange policy was thus broken between 1931 and 
T933> but thereafter it was resumed on a different level. This 
fixed exchange money policy means that if commodity prices 
in Britain remain steady, commodity prices in New Zealand 
also remain steady. If British prices fluctuate violently — as they 
have done to a ruinous extent — New Zealand prices must also 
fluctuate with equal violence. That is the position so long 
as the one monetary unit is freely exchangeable for the other 
at a fixed rate. At present the fixed rate remains, but free 
exchange is prohibited. 

" The alternative monetary policy to a fixed exchange is to 
regulate the supply of money in New Zealand to maintain 
a steady internal price level, and let the exchange rate fluctuate 
as the outside price level fluctuates. Low prices in Britain 
would then mean a low exchange rate. Exported produce 
would bring all the time a steadier price in our money. Money 
would thus be made a much more accurate measure of value 
than it now is. This would naturally mean a reduction of 
financial anxiety and worry for everyone exchanging goods 
and services in return for money payments, which is 
practically everybody. If the people maintained production, 
the money end would take care of itself. This is the most 
urgently needed social reform in the world. 

" The banks in the past have regulated the quantity of money 
in circulation so' as to be able to deliver sterling on demand 
at the fixed rate of exchange. . . Methods of regulation 
would suffice to maintain a steady internal price level. Those 
controlling the issue of money, instead of watching the exchange 
rate, would simply watch the various price indices now compiled 
and any additional ones they thought necessary to have 
compiled. If prices started rising above the point fixed, money 
would be withdrawn from circulation : if prices began to fall 
more money would be got into circulation. This is done all 
the time now. To vary the circulation of money, interest 
rates on overdrafts and fixed deposits are altered ; bank 
advances are contracted or expanded. . . In controlling money 
to keep the price level steady no attempt would be made to 
control the price of individual commodities. 1 What would be 

1 What is said here by Mr. Field in The Truth about New Zealand must 
be supplemented by the teaching of Pope Pius XI in Quadragesima Anno 
on the r61e of vocational groups. When the Guilds or Vocational Groups 
are organized and functioning under a State Charter, the activities of the 
groups will be directed to the Common Good and they will strive to arrive 
at just prices for the goods or services they furnish. The State will exercise 
supreme control. 



70 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

done would be, in effect, to make up a market basketful of 
stable commodities, the quantity of each article in the basket 
being in proportion to the quantity passing in trade. The 
objective would then be so to regulate the value of money in 
circulation that a New Zealand pound-note would, as nearly 
as possible, always buy this basketful. Flour might be up, 
butter down, and every item moving according to demand and 
supply, but, averaged over the lot, possession of a pound-note 
would enable its holder to walk home with just about the same 
total basketful all the time. 

" Stabilizing money takes the money factor out of price 
fluctuations, and leaves just the non-monetary factors of 
demand and supply of commodities. As one well-known 
writer on these subjects has pointed out, the money factor 
is like the tides of the ocean, and the commodity demand- 
and-supply factor is like the waves of the sea, bobbing up and 
down to different levels all the time. The tides are the big 
factor determining the level of the water, and the waves a 
comparatively small factor, even in the greatest storm. The 
money factor is like the tides, and is the principal thing 
determining the price level. If it is got under control we can 
have a stability and a prosperity in industry that we can never 
know to-day." 

Mr. Field then shows by means of index figures the practical 
working on the exchange rate with London of a stabilized 
price level in New Zealand and adds that the effect of the 
exchange movement would be to iron out price fluctuation 
to a large extent. He concludes the chapter with the obser- 
vation that " stability in internal purchasing power is the only 
sensible basis on which to control money. Money must be 
made a just measure of value. If it is not, every money trans- 
action perpetrates injustice, with debts on one level and 
prices of commodities on another level.' And injustice sooner 
or later means the disintegration of the existing social order." 

Some important remarks on this aspect of national monetary 
reform are to be found in Minority Report No. Ill of the Irish 
Banking Commission (1938), drawn up by Mr. P. J, O'Loghlen. 
In Chapter I of his report and in his Appendix II, Mr. 
O'Loghlen stresses the fundamental disorder of modern 
economic life, which has been so much insisted on in this 
book, namely, the subordination of members of Christ to 
production and of production to finance, or, to put it more 
succinctly, the domination of money over society. After a 
brief allusion to the foundation of twenty-six central banks 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 71 

in twenty-six different countries, affiliated to the Bank for 
International Settlements established at Basle, he quotes from 
the Majority Report, from which he is a dissentient, the follow- 
ing statement on the functions of a central bank. " The principal 
duty of a central bank is to maintain the integrity of the national 
monetary unit. To carry out this task the central bank has to 
ensure the maintenance of external stability (in terms of gold, 
or sterling, or some other currency), and to take care of the 
monetary reserves of gold or foreign exchange, and also to 
have certain means to influence the currency and credit position 
within the country." Mr. O'Loghlen then adds : " The 
objective of monetary policy, here so plainly stated, namely, 
the control or restriction of currency and credit within the 
country, appears to me to be one in which the interests of 
bondholders, and those who trade in money, are given complete 
precedence, and the interests of the ordinary people in each 
country, who need remunerative employment above all else, 
are considered to be of a very minor importance. I have already 
stated my view that the currency and credit position within 
the country should reflect its own power to produce wealth, 
its capacity for development, and the necessity to provide 
employment for its people. It is the stated view of my col- 
leagues (of the Majority Report) that these things. . . are 
secondary considerations and should be sacrificed to maintain 
a fixed foreign exchange rate." 

Now, the maintenance of stability in purchasing power 
of national exchange-media has not been a desideratum 
wherever the money power has exercised domination over 
society. In fact money has come to dominate, as we have seen, 
largely through the disregard of this indispensable condition 
of the just functioning of an exchange-medium. Mr. O'Loghlen 
rightly insists upon aiming at stability of the price level in 
view of reversing the present disorder. " Owing to our attaching 
the Irish currency to that of Great Britain," he writes, " prices 
in Ireland have been determined hitherto by the prices ruling 
in England, with disastrous results for Irish agriculture. . . 
As agriculture will have to keep its costs down to the lowest 
possible level in order to retain its market in England, all 
hope of either a rising standard of living, or of an increasing 
internal market, will be in vain ; and in vain also, will be any 
hope of increased employment in the rural areas . . . Self- 
government does not consist in having a flag and the trappings 
and appearance of independence, but in having effective 
control over vital national interests. We have been persuaded 



72 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

by the Banking Commission of 1926 to relinquish all but the 
appearance of control over such important and vital national 
interests as our price level." But " there is no special validity 
attaching to any particular price level. The price level for any 
country is the level at which that particular country is best 
able to attain and maintain the fullest possible use of its 
resources. As the circumstances vary within wide limits, 
the levels of prices at which they will be able to maintain full 
employment will vary also. The maintenance of fixed rates 
of foreign exchange tends to force the prices in different 
countries to conform to a common level, thus preventing the 
development of price levels which are most conducive to the 
maintenance of full employment, and a remunerative return 
for industry. . . 

'* It is quite practicable to develop such levels of wages and 
prices within a particular country as are most conducive to the 
common good, and the appropriate, and indeed the only, 
means by which such a policy can be carried out is a national 
monetary system which has regard principally to the internal 
conditions of the country in which it operates, and which is 
directed to the maintenance of full employment for productive 
purposes, and also of such prices and wages as are most 
conducive to national well-being. On the other hand, a monetary 
system which aims at being international and which, by main- 
taining fixed rates of foreign exchange, forces internal 
conditions to accord with those of other countries, precludes 
us from adopting measures which would enable remunerative 
prices, or wages on which people can live in decent comfort, 
being realised in practical daily life. . . 

" If a fixed rate of foreign exchange is abandoned, and a 
policy of the internal development and use of all our resources 
is followed, there is no reason whatever to apprehend any 
wide or constant fluctuations of the exchange rates. As between 
England and ourselves, the movements of the exchange rate 
would correspond with movements in the levels of prices 
in the two countries ; and price levels, apart from abnormal 
conditions such as another war, will tend to move slowly 
and gradually. My proposals would not introduce wide or 
rapid fluctuations of prices in Ireland ; but would allow the 
two countries to adjust themselves to each other in accordance 
with their respective purchasing power, which would not be 
subject to any greater condition of instability than at present. 
Not only is this the case, but active steps could and should be 
taken by the Irish monetary authorities to minimise such 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 73 

inconvenience to importers and exporters as a moving rate 
of exchange may otherwise bring, by taking appropriate 
steps for this purpose. These steps should be : — 

" (1) To establish and maintain a forward market for 
foreign exchange in Ireland. 

" (2) To provide and control an equalisation fund, designed 
not to peg the rate of exchange at an arbitrary level, but to 
render as gradual as possible any movements of exchange 
rates which were the results of an active policy of internal 
development. . . 

" In Appendix I, I have outlined the character and scope 
of an Economic Development Commission which would be 
able to organise and to direct the unused productive resources 
of the nation, with the object of maintaining full employment, 
and so raising the standards of economic life. . . An effective 
balance between expansion and contraction of the volume of 
money would require to be maintained by the Economic 
Development Commission. The practicable daily test of the 
fluctuations of such a balance would be the maintenance 
of a constant and equal activity of the country's production 
and consumption, as disclosed by statistical indices [to be 
compiled by the Economic Development Commission], and 
the absence of any considerable degree of unemployment. . . 
The Economic Development Commission should be in close 
touch with the Currency Commission, the Department of 
Finance, and the banks, and should be represented on the 
Foreign Exchange Committee which I recommend should 
be established." 1 

In the pamphlet, The Arch-Enemy of Economic Freedom, 
Professor Soddy treats of some points not explicitly mentioned 
in his previous works. He deals excellently with the remedy 
proposed by some monetary reformers, namely, the closing 
of the price-gap so as to be fair to both producers and consumers. 
He also explains very clearly how to face the difficulty of 
investments in foreign countries. He examines the Morgenthau 
and Keynes Plans. Following Mr. McNair Wilson, he insists 
that stabilization of the internal price-level is the national 
policy required in every country, whereas, " the fixation of the 
foreign exchanges, which means continual see-sawing of the 
internal price-level, is favoured by all the megalomaniacs, 
who, whether from too optimistic humanitarian dreams or 
personal egotism, favour ' planning * on a world scale, and a 

1 Minority Report No. HI, by Mr. P. J. O'Loghlen, pp. 26, 42, 45, S°> 



74 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

premature attempt to unite all nations into one World- State 
with an international currency, in the belief, apparently, 
that a lie can become true if it is made universal. . . A premature 
move in the direction of world unification would endanger 
the nations losing such autonomy as now remains to them 
and the whole world would be dominated by the dictatorship 
of those who only seek power over the lives and labours of 
others." Professor Soddy here re-echoes the warning contained 
in A Twentieth Century Economic System, namely, that a 
Central International Bank must not be entrusted with the 
task of keeping the imports and exports of member nations in 
equilibrium. Multilateral trade could be provided for by the 
Exchange Controls of the participating nations having repre- 
sentatives at an International Exchange or Clearing House, 
but each nation must have charge of maintaining its own 
imports and exports in equilibrium. " If a Central International 
Bank were entrusted with this task instead of each nation 
being free to solve its own domestic problem in its own way, 
we should be once more back to the old condition of financial 
war to control a central monetary authority which, in its turn, 
would control the domestic affairs of so-called independent 
nations." 

Money or token-wealth, as we have seen, is destined by its 
nature to facilitate exchanges, so that the persons composing 
the families of a given unit or area may more easily be able to 
provide themselves with the necessities of life — food, clothes 
and shelter. Exchanges are, therefore, subordinate to this 
main purpose and " exchanges between nations situated all 
over the world (the establishment of which may be highly 
advantageous) are by their nature subsidiary both to the 
local development of wealth for the locality and to local 
exchange." 1 Local development must aim at avoiding waste 
and at being as full as possible, subject to the overriding 
requirements of personal freedom, family life and the properties 
of the soil. "It is common to hear nowadays that because 
Great Britain is a small island very densely populated, and 
because during the war we have sacrificed so many of our 
foreign securities, therefore, we must make it our first business 
to develop our foreign trade. The logic of this argument 
(and it is applied to many other countries besides Great 
Britain) has never been explained. Common sense with an 
eye upon primaries would hold that because our country is 

1 Article on Money in The Weekly Review, April 37, 1944. 



Outline of Principles of Monetary Reform 75 

densely populated and likely to feel the pinch of poverty, 
therefore we should apply ourselves to an intense local 
production (always governed by the dictates of the soil) and 
to internal exchanges, and thus provide our primary economic 
needs in the most economical way with as little dissipation as 
possible of our real wealth abroad. Such a general policy 
would ensure at once the provision of necessities before 
luxuries and the fullest possible use of the talents and initiative 
of our people." 1 The excellent article in The Weekly Review 
from which we have just been quoting was occasioned by a 
recently published Statement of Principles for an International 
Monetary Fund. Concerning this statement the article says : 
" The International Monetary Proposals whatever their 
technical merits or defects may be (and a Committee of financial 
experts in control of an international fund must cause some 
concern as being the opposite pole from anything like a 
democratic or even national system), deal only with the 
machinery of an activity [the manipulation of international 
exchange-medium] two removes from primary economics. . . 
From this it follows that no economic Utopia can be expected 
to result from the joint statement of the financial experts ; 
it tends rather to tighten the grip that a few non-national 
financiers have upon the world." 

Article on Money in The Weekly Review, April 27, 1944. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE FULL RETURN TO ORDER 

How have the two evils deplored by Professor Soddy and so 
many others, namely, the domination of Finance over Politics 
and Economics and the instability of national price-levels 
become so widespread ? In this as in other cases the ultimate 
reason is to be found in the refusal of men to submit to the 
Divine Plan for order in the world through the Mystical Body 
of Christ. In spite of the naturalistic opposition of the Jewish 
nation to the Supernatural Messias and to His Plan for order, 
and notwithstanding the weakness of fallen human nature, 
Western Europe in the thirteenth century had come to acknow- 
ledge God's Rights in the way He Himself had laid down and 
had organized society on the basis that man's supreme dignity 
was his supernatural and supranational life as a member of 
Christ. The truth was recognized that all men were members 
of Christ, actual or potential, and that society as such was 
bound to favour membership of Christ. The Guilds of the 
Middle Ages were an application of this great doctrine of 
human solidarity in Christ to economic affairs. Social life, 
in which Politics and Economics would be put into watertight 
compartments and sectioned off from the life of members of 
Christ was completely alien to the minds of that day. Western 
Europe as a whole then recognized the authority of the Vicar 
of Christ the King, and his right to say what was moral or 
immoral in Politics and Economics. As far back as the Council 
of Nicaea (325), in which the Divinity of the Head of the 
Mystical Body was defined, the Church had declared war on 
usury. The domination of Finance over Politics and Economics 
had proved disastrous for the Roman Empire, just as it is 
proving disastrous for States in our own times. 

Accordingly, in spite of deficiencies and imperfections, 
the society of Western Europe down to the sixteenth century 
was organized under the banner of Christ the King and 
accepted the fact that there was a moral law binding on finan- 
ciers as well as on politicians and economists. The revolt of 
the sixteenth century sectioned off the Christian life from the 
life of the Citizen, so political and economic organization 
left membership of Christ out of account. According to the 

76 



The Full Return to Order jj 

Catholic ideal, the one divinely-instituted ideal, the whole 
life of a member of Christ is meant to be subject to Christ 
and animated with the meritorious Supernatural Life of 
Grace, just as all the movements of the hand or of any other 
member are subject to the head in the physical body. In addition, 
there is solidarity between the members of the Mystical Body 
as there is between the members of the physical body. According 
to the Lutheran ideal all the activity of a Christian in the 
world is withdrawn from the rule of Christ and given over to 
Naturalism. 

Lutheranism, then, initiated that dualism, which separates 
life into two halves so independent that they have only accidental 
relations with each other and thus prepared the way for 
Liberalism. Liberalism is simply the application of Naturalism 
to morality, politics, economics, and finance. Perhaps we may 
best describe it by saying that it consists in erecting particular 
sections of human activity, economic or political, into separate 
domains, each with its own autonomous end completely 
independent of the final end of man as a member of Christ. 
Thus when Politics and Economics were withdrawn from 
subjection to the moral law binding on members of Christ, the 
manipulation of money or exchange-medium was in due course 
withdrawn from subjection to Politics and Economics and 
erected into an autonomous department of life subject only 
to its own laws. The nominalist philosophy of Locke, the 
philosopher of the Bank of England, favoured the same 
tendency. " At the time the new social order was beginning," 
writes Pope Pius XI in the Encyclical Letter, Quadragesima 
Anno, " the doctrines of Rationalism had already taken firm 
hold of large numbers, and an economic science alien to the 
true moral law had soon arisen, whence it followed that free 
rein was given to human avarice." The Catholic Church, 
guided by the Holy Ghost, sees far ahead. Locke's Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding and Mill's Principles of 
Political Economy are on the Index. 1 

The rending of the Mystical Body by the so-called Reforma- 
tion movement and the uprise of private judgement or 
individualism on the supernatural level, led inevitably to the 
breaking up of the Guild organization and to the uprise of 
individualism, that is, of unbridled self-seeking, on the natural 
level of production, distribution and exchange of material 

1 For the development of these ideas see The Mystical Body of Christ 
and the Reorganization of Society and The Workingmeris Guilds of the 
Middle Ages. 



7$ Money Manipulation and Social Order 

goods. In his work on The Economic Effects of the Reformation, 
Professor George O'Brien has shown the effect of the Calvinist 
or Puritan doctrine of success in life as a sign of man's 
predestination. The result of the unlimited competition, 
unscrupulous underselling and feverish advertising, was 
inevitably the subordination of human beings to production. 
" The new conception of Christianity," writes Father Eustace 
Dudley, 1 " which replaced the old ideal, taught a radically 
different doctrine regarding the relation of this life to the 
next, and particularly as regards the value and purpose of 
good works and moral living. It was a doctrine that centred 
the whole of man's energy on the successful fulfilment of his 
vocation as a sure proof of his election ; and which whilst 
it produced a prudent painstaking type of Christian with a 
great passion for duty, yet rendered impossible the fulfilment 
of his duties towards his weaker brethren. Believing as he did, 
and supported in his belief by the political economists of the 
time, that his own enlightened selfishness was productive of the 
highest happiness for the greatest number, he soon came 
to classify the poor and less fortunate as the product of laziness 
and vice ; and they, neglected and forgotten, became either 
the victims of capitalism or were hidden away in state institu- 
tions under the stigma of poverty." The self-centred economic 
theories of Calvinism replaced the self-sacrificing asceticism 
of members of Christ. The aim of society became, not to 
supply a sufficiency of goods to families, so that the human 
personality of their members might be cultivated to the 
utmost, but to produce as much as possible, irrespective of the 
deleterious effects on the personality of the workers engaged 
in production. 

But the subjection of human personality to the production 
of material goods is not the end of the perversion of order. 
There is a further stage of decay, which is realized by the 
subordination of the production of real wealth to the 
manipulation of exchange-medium or token wealth. Gradually 
Finance came to occupy the disordered dominant position 
it holds to-day. In his work Die Juden und das Wirtschaftsleben, 
the first edition of which appeared in 1911, Professor Werner 
Sombart aptly sums up the situation as follows : " If we want 
to make clear in one sentence the direction in which modern 
political economy is moving, we can say : the stock-exchange 
agents of the banks are becoming in an ever-increasing measure 

1 National Returrtetion, pp. 49-50. 



The Full Return to Order 79 

the dictators of economic life. All economic happenings 
are more and more subordinate to the decisions of finance. 
The question whether a new industrial undertaking is to spring 
up or an existing one to be developed ; whether the owner of 
a shop or a store is to get the means to extend his business, 
all these questions are decided in the offices of Banks and 
Bankers. In just the same way the sale of products is becoming, 
in an ever greater degree, a problem of finance. Our greatest 
industries are indeed already just as much financial associations 
as industrial undertakings." Leadership amongst financial, 
industrial and commercial interests has thus passed to the 
powerful groups which have secured " a monopoly in the 
creation of national credit and these groups, being inter- 
nationally organized, have only to be left free in order to 
dominate the earth." 1 

The Collectivist reaction against Liberalism and laissez-faire 
has not attempted to undo the fundamental disorder whereby 
family-life and the soil of the earth are sacrificed for industry 
and commerce, and industry and commerce are subordinated 
to finance. On the contrary, " to-day we see taking shape what 
promises to be one of the most amazing compromises of 
history — the courtship and impending union of finance- 
capitalism and socialism in the bonds of an unholy matrimony. 
The high contracting parties have apparently drawn up their 
ante-nuptial contract ; at any rate they seem to be agreed 
upon such measures of collectivisation — sometimes politely 
called rationalisation — as may be necessary to wipe out the 
small units in industry and commerce. Larger units not 
amenable to discipline will be socialised outright ; others 
will be merged in huge monopolies, bureaucratically planned. 
The small manufacturer will surrender his independent 
status to become a minor functionary in some official or 
semi-official industrial combine ; the small shop-keeper will 
pull down his shutters to become a counter-hand in a sort of 
universal chain-store."* 

Fallen man cannot maintain the rule of reason over the 
senses and observe order in social life, unless he subjects 
his reason to God and acknowledges Our Lord Jesus Christ 
and His Divine Plan for world-order. According to the 
hierarchical order of the practical sciences, the art of manipula- 
ting money is subordinate to Economics, the science which, 

1 Article in The Weekly Review, May 11, 1944, by A. K. Chesterton. 
1 Ibid. In a word, men will be treated as mere individuals, not as persons. 



So Money Manipulation and Social Order 

according to St. Thomas, studies families in the constituent 
relations of their members and in their conditions of existence, 
and to Politics, the science which has for object the organization 
of the State in view of the complete Common Good of the 
families and persons composing it. Decisions as to what 
is for the Common Good of the State and family life must be 
made, not by those skilled in the manipulation of money but 
by those in charge of the Common Good and of the maintenance 
of sound family life. Those skilled in the manipulation of 
money are masters of an auxiliary art furnishing to Politics 
and Economics the instrument they need. The revolt against 
the Supernatural Life and the Divine Plan for order and the 
withdrawal of Politics and Economics from subjection to the 
Mystical Body of Christ have gradually led to the overthrow 
of the natural hierarchical order of the practical sciences. 
Money now rules. Those skilled in manipulating it dictate 
policy to Statesmen and Economists. Combines and monopolies 
oust small family businesses, farming is treated as an industry 
to be mechanized in imitation of the factory, and the land, 
the source of the necessaries of life, is exhausted. The results 
are apparent everywhere in the decay of family-life and the 
loss of soil fertility. The proper functioning of money is not a 
panacea for all disorders, as is clear from all I have written 
here and elsewhere, but its improper functioning is even more 
disastrous nowadays than it was in the days of the Roman 
Empire. The pace of life (and of destruction) has been accel- 
erated by modern inventions. 

The Beveridge Report in England does not aim at undoing 
the disordered domination of finance. On the contrary, it 
accepts the dictation of finance over industry and, acquiescing 
in that reversal of order, it tends to promote the return of the 
Servile State, by the introduction of compulsion and by 
nationalization of the majority of the medical profession. 1 

1 " (Beveridge) does not stress in his report all the sanctions and disciplines, 
and even coercions, which the implementation of Social Security will 
actually involve, but they are implicit " {Insurance for AH and Everything, 
by R. Davison, quoted by Rev. L. Watt, S.J., in A Catholic View of the 
Beteridge Plan, p. 8. 

" That part of the Beveridge Plan which would lead to the nationalization 
of the greater part of the medical profession is manifestly unjust to the 
public as well as to the doctors themselves. The services of the few medical 
practitioners not forced to become State servants would be available only 
to the rich. The remaining doctors would lose their independence and their 
initiative, with deplorable consequences to the future of their profession. 
It is barely credible that the planners can really believe that the services 
which doctors now render to the public will be maintained under State 



The Full Return to Order 81 

An excellent pamphlet by the Public Relations Committee 
of the Belfast Division of the B.M.A. points out that the 
basic proposal of the White Paper on a National Health 
Service (February, 1944) is " A Central Employment Board 
for Doctors." " Under the proposed Social Security plan," 
the pamphlet states, " disability benefit is to be paid to insured 
persons, so long as the disability lasts, subject to acceptance 
of medical treatment. Thus in future a patient may be faced 
with the alternative of taking his doctor's advice (or orders ?) 
or losing the disability benefit for which he has been taxed. 
Strict control of medical certification means, of course, dis- 
ciplinary measures against the doctors who err too often in 
favour of the patient and the opening of personal medical 
records to a Government Department, in a position to give 
an absolute ruling which cannot be questioned in the Courts 
of Justice. To aid in the detection of malingering the number 
of c sick visitors * is to be increased. ... No provision is 
made in the document for the medical profession, organised 
in a service, to remain free to express advice and views to 
Parliament and the public. Criticism, however needed to 
ventilate individual grievances, would become * politics.' . . , 
On certain matters, the all important ones of policy, the 
decision of the Minister is to be final. As regards disciplinary 
measures, there is to be no questioning his judgement in the 
Courts of Law. Not only is the Central Board, under the 
aegis of the Minister, to have the above powers, but it will 
have the power to move doctors about from one part of the 
country to another. ... He who gives up freedom seeking 
security soon loses both freedom and security." 

Another pamphlet, entitled " The Political Planners," by 
the same Body on the same subject, says : " There is a growing 
suspicion, within the medical profession . . . that the White 
Paper's proposals were originally inspired by a desire to control 
an independent profession in order to safeguard medical 
certification on behalf of a Treasury indirectly paying out 
sickness benefits from a special Social Insurance Fund. 
To-day the medical profession is awakened to the dangers of 

control" {Our Peace Crisis, by Arthur Rogers). Cf. Barrier to Health, 
by Douglas Boyd (The Abbey Press, Bangor, Co. Down, Ireland). 

The booklet, Our Peace Crisis, by Arthur Rogers, published by the 
Sterling Press, 38 Bedford Street, London, W.C.a, contains excellent 
information about the groups that are planning for the increase of State 
control. Information about P.E.P. (Political and Economic Planning 
Group) was given years ago, in All These Things (1936) and Facts about the 
Bank of England (1937), by A. N. Field, New Zealand. 



82 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

a Treasury conditioned outlook. . . . The British Medical 
Association is against the submergence of the individual in 
an authoritarian State such as we are fighting against to-day 
in all the battlefields of the War." The domination of finance 
is to be used to attack family-life in another way also, in order 
to " oil the wheels of industry." 1 " In the promotion of the 
cause of social servitude," writes Arthur Rogers in Our Peace 
Crisis (p.38), " the Beveridge Report has as its companion the 
Education Bill, brought in by Mr. R. A. Butler in December, 

1943, the object of which is a general reorganization 
of education." " The children of to-day, and the unborn, 
will, as the human elements essential to our economic su- 
premacy, be bent, toughened and trained in the New Edu- 
cational System : through physical training, intensified school 
medical services, midday meals at school (mothers at work). . . 
Their parents must not interfere." 8 

In Our Peace Crisis (pp. 86, 93, 94, 95), Arthur Rogers 
insists also upon the Naturalism or Anti-Supernaturalism of 
many of those engaged in post-war planning in England. 
" It will not be enough," he writes, " to stop the two-pronged 

1 The phrase is quoted from Mr. R. A. Butler, by Mr. C.I. Kelly in 
The Catholic Times, May 26, 1944. It is clear from Mr. Kelly's excellent 
article that the Education Bill is part of the preparation for another attempt 
to outstrip other nations in what has been misnamed " a favourable balance 
of trade." This new effort to galvanize industrialism will have disastrous 
effects on farming and, as in the past, will set up that tension which makes 
war inevitable. 

8 Article by Mr. C. I. Kelly in The Catholic Times, May 26, 1944. 

It is well to add that the English White Paper on Employment recently 
issued, explicitly proposes to continue the pre-war ruinous policy towards 
farming. It states that " we must continue to import from abroad a large 
proportion of our foodstuffs and raw materials and to a greater extent 
than ever before we shall have to pay for them by the export of our goods 
and services." Commenting, in The Weekly Review, September 7th, 

1944, on a recent pronouncement of the British Minister for Agriculture 
to the effect that agriculture will do well " for some years to come," Mr. A. 
K. Chesterton asks why the Minister does not promise that farming will 
continue to flourish. Though English agriculture has been increased by 
over 70 per cent, since the beginning of the war and has been restored to 
something like its former prosperity, yet the country is " still a long way 
from being able to meet its own needs." " The answer is/' Mr. Chester- 
ton continues, " that as soon as the last gun is fired the whole immense 
might of the City of London will be directed to the task of securing new 
foreign bonds to replace the old which the war swallowed. And to achieve 
this end the lenders of money abroad will desire to wave the bait of the 
British market before the eyes of agrarian countries, as well as to ensure 
that their interest will continue to arrive in the traditional form of foreign 
foodstuffs. . . . On that aceount, beyond any doubt whatever, foreign 
foodstuffs will be allowed to flood into this country the moment the war 
ends, and an attempt will be made to buy off the British farmer's wrath 
by promising him a share of the newly liberated markets. . . . What 
makes the position even more grotesque is that the game of foreign lending 
is very nearly played out." 



The Full Return to Order 83 

advance of the Beveridge and Butler Panzer Divisions, now 
developing into a menacing pincer movement. . . . We 
must face the fact that, at present, the British nation is being 
actually planned out of existence. The restoration of the 
family, with the father its head and the mother its heart, is 
an absolute necessity. This point of policy touches upon 
most other matters of social policy and many matters of 
economic policy. ... It is not possible that the original 
instigators of current policies and proposals . . . believe in 
man's fall from [the Supernatural Life of] Grace. . . . This 
is not altogether surprising. In Great Britain, as in other 
countries, a small minority of individuals — determined and 
powerful — reject the Christian view of the nature of man, 
believing stubbornly in the diametrically opposite view that 
it is within the power of man to become as God, through his 
own material knowledge. ... It is among those who hold 
this belief — which is the apotheosis of materialism, and which 
some call the serpent cult, or Satanism — that there are people 
who aspire to a millennium which they believe to be attainable 
through their becoming themselves the masters of mankind. 
Such people promote socialism and kindred forms of material- 
istic religion, also class hatred, revolutions and wars, as agencies 
of destruction ; and there can be no doubt that it is in their 
philosophy that the Planning movement has its first origin. 
. . . From a denial of original sin ... it is but a short step 
to acceptance of the view that man is an evolving being, who 
is perpetually improving or progressing. . . . Those who hold 
this view are identifiable by their references to * progress,' 
made without any indication, or apparent thought, of the goal 
to which man is, as they say, ' progressing ' or of the end for 
which man is made. . . . Judging from their plans and their 
arguments, it is safe to assume that nearly all our leading 
Planners are * progressives,' rather than instructed Christians, 
where they are not actively anti-Christian." 

It was the conviction of their membership of Christ that 
nerved the early Christians for the long struggle for order 
under the Roman Empire. That same conviction, shared in 
and acted upon by all Catholics the world over, will be necessary 
to undo the present reversal of order in economic organization. 
The first fruit of that conviction ought to be the demand by 
Catholics of all nations that the political, economic and financial 
arrangements between States at the end of the present conflict 
shall be submitted as to their morality to the judgement of the 
Sovereign Pontiff, the Vicar of Christ. 



APPENDIX I 
MONEY BANK DEPOSIT 

The following explanations of the above terms from the pen 
of Professor O'Rahilly, the distinguished President of 
University College, Cork, will, I am sure, be useful to my 
readers. 

Money 

" Money as such — apart from its material record — is 
something immaterial : it is a moral and legal relationship, 
something instituted by man, and hence not existing in nature 
or in the animal world. It is a socially recognised right-to-buy 
transferable from one person to another. It is not made out of 
anything : it is just issued or created, just as a person makes 
a promise or creates a contractual relationship. The State, 
representing the Community, issues money, which is usually 
recorded on bits of paper or pieces of metal, but may be recorded 
merely by a few figures in ink on the books of the Central 
Bank. The banks issue money by bank notes and still more 
by mere entries on their books, which we transfer to one 
another by cheques, i.e., by directing the banker to alter his 
book entries " (The Standard, April 17, 1942). 

Bank 

" A bank nowadays is an institution which, on the basis 
of a proportion of State-money created by the Central Bank, 
creates another and more convenient form of money (trans- 
ferable by cheque) for the Government as well as for 
individuals or firms. . . The banks are public utility 
institutions, exercising the communally delegated function 
of creating (and cancelling) the money required by the com- 
munity. They are entitled only to a strictly controlled service 
charge ; and when the service is provided for the State itself 
(or for public works), the charge may well be * nil or even 
negative * " (The Standard, Oct. 1, 1943). 



86 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Deposit 

" Deposit has an entirely different meaning to-day from 
depositum, just as the word bank itself has changed its meaning. 
In Roman Law, depositum means anything entrusted for 
safe-keeping to another who does not acquire any property 
in the tiling. It can be translated a bailment or — to invent a 
new term — an entrust. This primitive function still subsists 
in modern banks — in the plate, jewellery, securities, etc., 
kept in a banker's safe or strong-room. . . Nowadays a 
deposit is the liability of the banker to pay a sum on demand, 
a right of action which he has created against himself in order 
to purchase an asset or counter-claim. It is not a depositum, 
it is not the cash in reserve, it is not some thing or some 
value entrusted to the banker as bailee. Even if the customer 
lodges legal tender, this is not a depositum but what in Latin 
is called a mutuum, i.e., a loan. . . A ' deposit ' no longer 
means a depositum but a debt " (Money, pp. 48, 49, 70), 



APPENDIX II 

GARDENS, FERTILIZERS AND FINANCE 

An excellent little book, entitled The Compost Gardener, 
has been written by Mr. F. C. King, at the suggestion and 
with the aid of that eminent authority on farming and the care 
of the land, Sir Albert Howard. Sir Albert says in the Intro- 
duction that it was one of the compensations he had for having 
to evacuate his home in 1940 that he was able to make the 
acquaintance of Mr. F. C. King, a head-gardener of twenty-five 
years* experience in Westmoreland. 1 

The book is essentially practical and consists of Mr. King's 
lectures on how best to grow about twenty-five ordinary 
vegetables : Cabbage, Broccoli, Carrots, Parsnips, Onions, 
etc., etc. These lectures, however, are unusual ; unusual 
because based on the natural order, which has been overthrown 
by the disorder consequent upon the domination of finance 
and paper costs in modern life. The natural order demands 
that to have healthy human beings, the animals and plants 
upon which the human beings feed must be healthy. In order 
that the animals may be healthy, the plants, by which they are 
nourished, must be healthy. The health of the series, therefore, 
starts with the health of the soil, on which the plants grow. 
" When we compare our efforts with those of Nature," writes 
the author, " it is obvious- that there is something seriously 
wrong somewhere with a system of cultivation which robs 
plants of their natural birthright — health — and makes it 
imperative either continually to change our stock of plants 
or to employ poison sprays to protect them from pests and 
disease. . . In my judgement the first condition of successful 
gardening is to build up soil fertility. The appearance of pests 
or disease is a warning that our soil needs attention and that 
steps should at once be taken to correct this state of affairs 
by seeing that the vegetable wastes of the garden are converted 
into humus and returned to the soil. Our crops will then be 
provided with a store of balanced food. . . The problem of 
manuring is simple. All we have to do is to supply the earth- 

1 The Compost Gardener is published by T. Wilson and Son, Ltd., Higbgate, 
Kendal, Westmoreland. 

87 



88 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

worm and the invisible labour force — moulds and microbes — 
with the humus they need. The waste products of these 
unseen workers then feed the crop. . . As the fertility of our 
soil is built up, pests and diseases disappear, because once the 
soil is fertile the crops protect themselves. . . I have used 
many tons of compost and have been impressed by the almost 
total absence of pests such as wireworms and slugs. . . I am 
convinced, after years of observation, that crops would give 
heavier yields if we were not so keen on depriving the soil 
of waste vegetable matter and on poisoning the soil by the use 
of fungicides and insecticides.* 1 

Sir Albert Howard contributes a very useful chapter on 
" Compost and its Preparation." *t The operations of Nature," 
he writes, " are based on humus. . . . Nature never provides 
artificial manures to stimulate growth or poison sprays to 
destroy insect and fungous diseases. If we copy Nature in 
our gardening we can make our garden manure itself and also 
produce crops which are not only resistant to pests, but also 
transmit disease resistance and health to ourselves. This, in 
brief, is the basis of organic gardening." 

The book, too, contains a fine section on how to prepare 
and cook vegetables, contributed by Mrs. Gordon Grant, 
whose work, Feeding the Family in War-Time^ is published 
by George G. Harrap & Co., Ltd. 

INORGANIC FERTILIZERS 

" Commercial manures," writes Mr. King, " may be roughly 
divided into two classes : organic and mineral. In my opinion 
the sparing use of the organic class [Fish meal, Bones, Rape 
meal, etc.] will often give beneficial results for a time, but 
there is no place for mineral inorganic fertilizers in a well- 
conducted garden." He then goes on to speak of the deleterious 
effects of Nitrate of Soda, Sulphate of Ammonia, Basic Slag, 
Superphosphate of Lime, and the Fotassic Manures — Kainit, 
Sulphate of Potash, etc. With regard to Basic Slag and Super- 
phosphate of Lime, he says : " I have used considerable 
quantities of both and was quite satisfied at the time that I 
had done a wise thing ; now I am patiently retracing my steps 
and building up the fertility of the soil under my charge on 
a surer foundation. The good effects from the use of these 
artificials were not maintained and the deterioration of the 
land was so marked that I had no option but to discontinue 
their use. ... If the land is treated with artificial manures, 



Gardens, Fertilizers and Finance 89 

we encourage pests and disease. To control these, more 
poisonous substances are used in the form of washes and 
powders, thereby producing the death of the inhabitants of 
the soil which alone make and maintain soil fertility." Mr. 
King strongly recommends the use of sewage sludge and 
says that it is far better than even farmyard manure. 

On the other hand, both Basic Slag and Superphosphate 
of Lime are recommended for grasslands in Ley Farming, by 
Sir. R. George Stapledon and William Davies (Penguin 
Series),, and in Back to Better Grass, by I. G. Lewis (Faber 
and Faber, Ltd.), as well as in Soil and Sense, by Michael 
Graham (Faber and Faber, Ltd.). 

The Earl of Portsmouth (Viscount Lymington) in Famine 
in England (H. F. and G. Witherby, Ltd.) seems to sum up 
the situation excellently. " The farmer," he writes, " having 
exhausted his soil, has often tried to repair the loss, not by 
the relatively costly business of good mixed farming, but by 
artificial manures. Appropriately enough, the artificial 
manure-maker is the manufacturer of high explosives, so what 
he gains on the swings of war he can keep on the roundabouts 
of peace. The reckless use of artificial manure is as destructive 
as the careless handling of explosives. . . . Artificial manures 
may be useful in exceptional cases to stimulate production, 
or as with basic slag to help derelict grass land, but unless they 
are used in conjunction with good farming they are highly 
dangerous. The processes of life depend as much on decay 
as on growth. Healthy growth can only take place when there 
has been proper decay of organic matter which becomes humus. 
This can only be brought about by the working of soil bacteria. 
Reckless use of sulphate of ammonia, nitro-chalk, potash and 
other salts kill the bacteria, and so the plant cannot remain 
healthy when there is no humus in the soil. Thus the over- 
dosing of badly farmed soil with artificial manure can complete 
the ruin which the endless cereal crops and cutting of forests 
have started." 1 

It may be well to add a few words on the question of the 
use of sprays from another distinguished farmer and writer, 

1 " Lime, phosphate and potash sometimes have important places in the 
land's constitution, but they and the nitrogen manures, play only a small 
part in feeding it. . . Artificial manures are no substitute for dung because 
they provide no humus " {Soil and Sense, pp. 96-97}. 

" It ha«* been established that the soil fraction which is the chief carrier 
of fertility is the humus. This is produced by the decay of plant structures 
and is assisted by the addition of animal wastes " (The Discipline of Peace, 
p. 122, by K. E. Barlow, Faber and Faber, Ltd.). 

G 



90 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

Lord Northboume. In Look to the Land he writes : " If 
there is any doubt as to whether artificial manures ought to 
be classed as poisons there can be no doubt about the classi- 
fication of the ever-increasing array of sprays which are applied 
to crops in order to kill pests. These are frankly poisonous. 
Arsenic, lead, copper, tar, oils, nicotine are freely used. They 
all get to the ground in the end, and what they do there, or 
even before they get there nobody knows. True, plants con- 
tinue to grow on the ground, but why is it that more and more 
spraying is necessary ? x 

In the controversy about die use of artificial manures and 
poison sprays, just as in the controversy about bread and 
roller mills, we must not forget the influence of the disordered 
domination of finance, under which we live, or rather, exist. 
This disordered domination of finance has been responsible 
for the ruin of much good land. " International debt and soil 
erosion," writes Lord Northbourne in Look to the Land, " are 
twin brother and sister, inseparables." Financial forces will 
favour the use of these substances, because the rhythm of 
production of them can be accelerated in order to pay interest 
on debt. Nature's rhythm, however, must be respected with 
regard to the soil, or else the results will be disastrous. 

The disastrous cycle which was begun at the dictation of 
" Science " and finance has been admirably outlined in an 
article by C. D. Bachelor in The Weekly Review t April 27, 
1944. " Nature's method of soil management," he writes, 

was practised by farmers for thousands of years, right up 
to the time when Baron Liebig made what was acclaimed as 
a marvellous discovery. 2 He analysed the ashes of plants 

1 A French-Canadian paper, L'Echo du Bos St. Laurent, 23rd July, 1927* 
quoted the journal of the American Chemical Society about the effect of 
the poisonous insecticides used on tobacco plants. The article states that 
considerable quantities of arsenic, etc., remain in the plants and pass from 
there into the systems of smokers. 

* " Rome was living on the tribute of her conquered provinces, just as 
a modern city lives upon the produce of distant farmlands — often beyond 
the seas. Rome had, like modern towns, a sewage system that disgorged 
into rivers and seas. , . A great German scientist, Baron von Liebig, 
writing in the year 1840, was perhaps the first man to notice what was 
happening. He observed that the quantity of minerals in the soil was 
limited, and that it was possible to measure the extent to which every crop 
exhausted the earth. That, of course, was on the assumption that there was 
no return of these minerals. Writing of the Roman system he said that 
their sewers engulfed, first the agricultural wealth of the Roman peasants, 
and later that of Sicily, Sardinia, and the ones fertile coast of Africa, He 
saw a similar fate threaten the modern world ; but at this point his argument 
took a curious turn. Instead of devising means to return sewage and 
garbage to the soil, he set his mind to work on substitutes — ersatz food 



«« 



Gardens, Fertilizers and Finance m 

and finding that they consisted of Nitrogen, Phosphates and 
Potash, declared that all that was necessary to grow crops in 
abundance was to incorporate these three chemicals into the 
soil and all would do well. His findings, backed up by com- 
merce, very quickly became practised by farmers and at the 
present day some millions of tons of chemicals are annually 
poured into the soil, with the result that the soil is being steadily 
poisoned, earth-worms, fungus and bacteria killed, and the 
balance of the soil completely upset. 

" The introduction of chemical farming soon brought about 
a censor from Nature in the shape of pests and diseases, which 
attacked both vegetation and soil with disastrous results. 
Undismayed, the chemists invented sprays, powders and 
washes — mostly of a poisonous nature — to combat the evil 
which they had instigated. 

" The chemists, even now, had not finished their task of 
destruction, for the food grown on chemicals and sprayed with 
chemicals soon had an adverse effect upon the health of man 
who consumed it, with the result that there was, and still is, 
an unprecedented demand for indigestion cures, stomach 
powders, nerve tonics, etc., which again fell to the chemists 
to invent and supply. A casual glance at the advertisements 
appearing in newspapers, periodicals and on the hoardings 
will testify to the amount of these patent medicines which must 
be consumed by the public. 

" To where is this age of chemical farming leading us ? 
There can be but one answer. To the complete destruction 
of soil fertility, ill-health and suffering amongst mankind and 
the ultimate starvation of all living things." 

ARTIFICIAL MANURES AND FINANCE 

I have quoted the statement of the Earl of Portsmouth that 
" the artificial manure-maker is the manufacturer of high 
explosives, so what he gains on the swings of war he can keep 
on the roundabouts of peace." An interesting article by 
H. D. C. P., in The Weekly Review, March 2, 1944, enables 
me to develop that point a little, and to add some further 
testimony to the effect of artificial manures on the land. " The 
English farmer," writes H. D, C. P., quoting from The Times , 

for the earth. He became the Father of Chemical Fertilisers. . . It is 
chiefly for lack of a regular return to the soil of organic manure, forming 
' humus ' that fertile land became dust -bowls and deserts " {Our Debt 
to the Soil, by Reginald Reynolds, in The Weekly Review, May 25, 1944)- 



92 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

" has been urged for the last five years to produce bumper 
crops at all costs ; he has done this, but in doing so he has 
to take out of the land far more than he has put in. 

" In this work he has been very materially assisted by the 
use of artificial manures. As a small holder myself, and one 
in constant touch with his farming neighbours, I can say 
from our corner of England that the verdict is unanimously 
against the continuance of this crop-snatching policy. Our 
land is impoverished, and we would never use another artificial 
again. 

" Now there are large vested interests in this drug trade. 
Will they be handled after the war in the same way as their 
companion interests in the armament industry, or will they 
be encouraged to survive ? . . . . The signs of the times in 
rural market towns are not propitious. The travellers in these 
things are far from packing up and retiring from the scene 
of their labours ; their directors urge them to greater efforts 
and the limelight of publicity still shines upon them. That 
which was a temporary war-time good has all the appearance 
of becoming a permanent peace-time evil, crops will continue 
to be snatched until the land of England becomes another 
* dust-bowl,' and all our food has to be imported from abroad. 
I have not heard that the directors of the industries concerned 
in this trade have been warned that their services will be 
no longer required, and that they are to be classed with the 
manufacturers of armaments whose efforts must be redirected 
into the productive works of peace. . . . 

" I had written so far when the Sunday Times kindly supplied 
an authoritative postscript in the form of a letter from Sir 
Albert Howard. Efe writes : ' The crux of this matter can 
be stated in a few words. Is the use of artificials and poison 
sprays, with or without humus, harmful to the soil, to the crops 
and animals raised thereon and to the health of the human 
population consuming such produce ? After a study of this 
question in four continents over a period of 45 years, during 
which I have had exceptional facilities as an investigator, I 
am convinced that the answer is : Most emphatically yes. 
This conclusion is shared by the growing body of pioneers 
with whom I am associated. Confirmatory evidence is now 
coming forward in a torrent .... That poison sprays and 
artificial manures are harmful is proved by a great mass 
of evidence. Two examples may be quoted. Arsenical washes 
kill the bees which are essential for pollination, seed formation 
and the production of honey. Artificials, sulphate of ammonia 



Gardens, Fertilizers and Finance n? 

in particular, destroy earthworms wholesale. These creatures 
are the great conditioners of food material for healthy crops. 
Once this important section of the potato growers' unpaid 
labour force is put out of action, the crops suffer from at 
least two new diseases — eelworm and virus — and the quality 
and keeping power of the produce deteriorate. A change 
over to freshly prepared humus in place of artificials is soon 
followed by the rapid disappearance of these troubles and 
by healthy crops.' " 

The Ideas underlying the Bio-dynamic Method of 

Composting. 

Mr. King's book, The Compost Gardener, embodies the 
sound ideas of Sir Albert Howard and the results of his own 
experiments. In warmly recommending it, and Sir Albert 
Howard's book, An Agricultural Testament (Oxford University 
Press), the present writer would like to utter a word of warning 
with regard to the theories associated with the name of Rudolph 
Steiner and the Anthroposophical Society founded by him. 
There seems to run through these theories s a Kabbalistic 
deification of man by his natural powers, a pantheistic cari- 
cature of our participation in the Inner Life of God in Three 
Divine Persons by Sanctifying Grace. 

In 1902, Rudolph Steiner became a member of the Theoso- 
phical Society under Mrs. Besant and was Secretary-General 
of the German section until 19 13, when he broke away from 
Mrs. Besant and founded the Anthroposophical Society, a 
name in all probability derived from a work entitled Anthro- 
posophia Magica published about 1650 by the occultist, Thomas 
Vaughan. Steiner built a temple for the adepts of Anthro- 
posophy at Dornach near Basel in Switzerland. The temple 
was burned in 1922 but rebuilt. Steiner died in 1925. 

According to Rene Guenon in Le Theosophisme, Steiner was a 
Rosicrucian. Steiner himself defined Anthroposophy as a path 
of knowledge to guide the Spiritual in the human being to the 
Spiritual in the Universe and so achieve the union of the life- 
force within man with the universal life-force without, thus 
forming the deified man. Steiner professed to teach the 
Spiritual Science by which this inner man could be awakened 
and brought into contact with the Spirit Beings or Masters 
who teach and develop man's life-force. According to him, 
the man, Jesus of Nazareth, united himself with one of these 
Beings and, as a consequence, " mighty forces streamed out 



94 Money Manipulation and Social Order 

from this event as an impulse for all later human develop- 
ment." The student of this Spiritual Science, " by the facul- 
ties that are in him, enters consciously the worlds where 
spiritual beings dwell and spiritual processes take place. He 
sees spiritual beings and spiritual processes, and he sees too 
how the beings and the processes of the physical world arise 
out of the spiritual. It is then his further task to express 
certain domains of what is revealed to his spiritual sight in 
the form of ideas." 

According to the writer of the book, Light-Bearers of 
Darkness , which I have utilized for what I have written in the 
last paragraph, in the first number of Steiner's magazine, 
Anthroposophy, there was an article on Eurhythmy. Eurhythmy, 
it said, has grown out of the essence of Anthroposophical 
Spiritual Science, and is based on an understanding ot the 
true nature of man and of his relation to the earth, as well as 
to the Planetary and Zodiacial Mysteries of the Cosmos. 
Steiner's Eurhythmy appears very suspicious. 

Here as elsewhere in the literature of secret societies (Ren 
Guenon in Le Theosophisme treats of the exoteric and esoteric 
Sections of the Anthroposophical Society), we find the lying 
statement of Satan that there is a knowledge of a life higher 
than that revealed and bestowed by Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
True God and True Man. This knowledge and this life, he 
suggests, are to be attained by the development of men's 
natural powers, and by them " they will be as gods." It is 
the old temptation. 

But how does all this concern the making of compost for 
the restoration of soil-fertility ? We shall see. In the book, 
Compost for Garden Plot or Thousand- Acre Farm y by Mr. 
F. H. Billington, formerly Inspector under the Irish Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, a very good summary is given of the 
different methods of making compost : 

(a) The Bio-dynamic system based on the ideas of Dr. 
Rudolph Steiner ; 

(b) The Indore method evolved by Sir Albert Howard ; 

(c) The Quick- Return system devised by Miss M. Bruce ; 

(d) The Adco method elaborated at the. Rothamsted Experi- 
mental Station, England. 

In Mr. Billington's summary of the Bio-dynamic method, 
we read such sentences as the following : " The essence of 
the Bio-dynamic methods lies in the conscious realization and 
application of fundamental life-force processes. ... It is postu- 
lated that the earth itself is a living organism, subject to 



Gardens, Fertilizers and Finance 95 

terrestrial and cosmic influences and rhythms — not a mere 
inert mass of matter." My readers will readily recognize the 
kinship between these expressions and the theories outlined 
above. 

It is always a pleasure to come into contact with a sound 
outlook on life in any of its departments. Sir Albert Howard's 
works are amongst the most remarkable in this respect. 
With regard to the life of the soil, he writes : " How does 
humus act ? Its chief function is to feed the unseen life of the 
soil (chiefly moulds and microbes) and also the burrowing 
animals like earthworms, so important in soil aeration. The 
wastes of this soil population, including the worms, then feed 
the plant. They also maintain the tilth or texture of the 
soil. . . . But it is not sufficient just to feed the soil population 
and to maintain the tilth. The soil needs a reserve of additional 
humus to absorb and retain water and to keep the ground 
warm." This quotation is taken from the chapter by Sir 
Albert on Compost, in Mr. King's book. There is a population 
living in ike soil, but the soil itself is not a living organism. In 
the Preface to his book, An Agricultural Testament (Oxford 
University Press), Sir Albert writes as follows about the 
Bio-dynamic system in general : " I remain unconvinced that 
the disciples of Rudolph Steiner can offer any real explanation 
of natural laws or have yet provided any practical examples 
of their theories." 



APPENDIX III 

DESTRUCTION OF QUININE TO KEEP UP PRICE 

In Chapter V we have seen something about the systematic 
destruction of the gifts bestowed by God on men for their 
use and benefit. A particularly sad example of such destruc- 
tion of portion of a valuable crop, in order to maintain a high 
price for the product, is given in the book entitled Germany's 
Master Plan, by Joseph Borkin and Charles A. Welsh. 1 On 
pages 82 and 83 of that work we read: " It is estimated that 
there are some 800,000,000 sufferers from malaria in the 
world to-day, more than 100,000,000 of whom are in India 
alone, accounting for 1,000,000 of the 3,000,000 deaths annu- 
ally. In the United States it was estimated in 1937 that there 
were more than 4,000,000 cases, the majority of which were 
in the Southern States. . . . 

" Since 1865, the Dutch have maintained one of the tightest 
of all monopolies by the usual methods of market control, 
but with consequences more immediately and dramatically 
tangible in the casualty lists of those stricken by malaria. . . . 
The 37,500 acres of [cinchona] trees [of the Dutch Quinine 
Syndicate's plantation in Java] supplied over 95 per cent, of 
the world's quinine. . . . The government sponsored syndicate 
of planters and manufacturers, the Kina Bureau of Amsterdam, 
maintained a high-price, low-output policy. Regardless of 
actual need or effective demand, only a limited amount of 
quinine was sold to each country. The annual harvests of 
cinchona bark . . . were often larger than the quotas. In such 
cases the excess bark was stored, or, more often, burned. It 
has been estimated that about 50 per cent, of the bark pro- 
duced was burned in some years. 

" The little quinine produced outside the Netherlands 
Indies was, through international agreement, subject to the 

1 This book is published by John Long, Ltd., London, New York, 
Melbourne. The authors are officials of the United States Government, 
but it is remarked in the Introduction by Thurman W.Arnold that their 
findings " have not been checked or approved in any official way." 

96 



Destruction of Quinine to Keep Up Price 97 

same price-fixing arrangements. Since the unconscionable 
high price precluded its purchase by the people of the areas 
where malaria occurs most frequently, the cartel's monopoly 
was criticized by social and medical workers in the East. 
The Health Section of the League of Nations . . . periodically 
published the production and price record of quinine and its 
derivatives, which so clearly bespoke the unrelenting control 
which had, with more efficient methods, made greater output 
possible, but increased prices and withheld ' surplus.* It is 
not too much to say that these practices were directly to 
blame for the continuance of a much higher death rate than 
that which would have obtained if maximum production and 
competitive price levels existed." 



APPENDIX IV 



OUTLINE OF ENGLISH HISTORY 



The following brief outline of English History from Henry 
VIII to William of Orange, taking account of the financial 
factor, may prove useful to students. For the development 
of the points here touched upon, The Two Nations, by Chris- 
topher Hollis, frequently referred to in the course of this book, 
and The Tragedy of the Stuarts, by J. Desmond Gleeson 
(London, Cecil Palmer), are strongly recommended. 

When Henry VIII attacked the Divine Plan for order, he 
prepared the downfall of the English popular Monarchy. 
The families that rose to wealth and power by the confiscation 
of the property of the Church and the Abbey lands, which 
were used for the maintenance of the poor and the education 
of the people, gradually hemmed in the Monarchy. The 
overthrow of the Monarchy by these new fortunes of the Cecils, 
the Cavendishes, the Cromwells and the rest was largely con- 
tributed to by the decline in the value of money during the 
1 6th and 17th centuries. Deriving from feudal times and 
customs, the normal Crown dues were fixed. While prices 
were rising and expenses increasing, the royal income remained 
at the old fixed rate. " Half an ounce of gold in Henry VIII's 
reign could scarcely be equalled by three ounces of gold in 
Charles Fs reign, roughly one century later . . . and yet, both 
Henry and Charles were in receipt of incomes represented 
by the same figure. . . . The true royal incomes, then, were 
in steady decline at the same time that the private incomes of 
a special group of men within the state were in a condition of 
steady increase, And moreover, with its decreasing means, 
the royal resources in lands were being rapidly lost to the 
Crown and gained by the new men. . . . The Crown had to 
be subsidized and the subsidy, naturally, came from the new 
rich lords. ... It was on this very question of subsidy that 
William Cecil and his partners were able to exercise control 
over Queen Elizabeth. It was in order to secure her money 

98 



Outline of English History 99 



was forced to yield to their requests, notably in the 

of the public execution of Mary Queen of 
1 



that she was 

matter 

Scots." 

James I was shrewd enough to size up the situation of the 
Monarchy and allowed Robert Cecil to guide him. Charles I 
" saw the dependence of the monarch upon the large owners 
become daily more abject, and he struck." 1 By James the 
First's death, the price-level was up to 550 and it was impos- 
sible for Charles I to pay off a debt of $\&. when he had only 
id. 3 Charles I " rebelled against those who would appoint 
themselves his pay-masters. ... He challenged the practical 
rights' of the new big fortunes to dictate to him because he 
had lost his fortune, and he lost the battle that ensued. . . . 
Charles II was brought back to England from foreign exile . . . 
as a salaried head of the state, almost as a salaried servant of 
the rich." 4 Charles, a very clever man, tried to shake himself 
free from the shackles with which he was bound. His experi- 
ment of issuing paper money failed, in part because, as 
Christopher Hollis points out, he issued his paper orders only 
for large sums. The bankers or goldsmiths were thus enabled 
to charge a large discount to those who wanted small sums 
and in this way brought discredit on the King's notes. 6 But 
the King's rising income from customs duties made him 
almost independent by the end of his reign. 

When James II, the creator of the English fleet, who was a 
convinced Catholic and a man not given to compromise like 
Charles II, came to the throne, the wealthy nobles had a 
twofold reason for plotting to get rid of him. They knew that 
he would not be a pliable servant and they feared a Catholic 
reaction which might reopen the question of the old Church 
lands. With the advent of William of Orange, the triumph 
of the Aristocracy over the Monarchy was complete. The 
foundation of the Bank of England, however, with its privilege 
of creating money, meant that wealth and power gradually 
passed into the hands of the financiers and the speculators 

1 The Tragedy of the Stuarts, pp. 85. 86. Christopher Hollis notes 
that in one year at the time of the Irish campaigns Elizabeth had to sell 
£170,000 worth of Crown lands. 

2 The Tragedy of the Stuarts, p. 87. 
8 Cf. The Two Nations, p. 13. 

* The Tragedy of the Stuarts, p. 87. 
s Cf. The Two Nations, p. xa. 



ioo Money Manipulation and Social Order 

with disastrous results for the landowners and the country- 
side. 1 The rule of the financiers and the speculators is called 
Democracy. 2 

To illustrate the significance of the remark that the 
manipulators of money rule, in spite of the label " Demo- 
cracy," a few sentences may be quoted from an excellent 
pamphlet, Money and National Reconstruction, by P. C. 
Loftus, M.P. (Economic Reform Club), " That the Bank 
of England was responsible for our disastrous post-war 
financial policy from 1920 to 193 1," he writes, " is widely 
and, I think, correctly believed. The cardinal error of that 
policy was the decision to return to the Gold Standard, 
especially to return to the pre-war parity, thereby doubling 
the value of the depreciated pound and doubling also the 
real value and actual burden of our vast National Debt. 
Warning voices were raised by individuals prominent in 
industry and finance pointing out that such a step must 
inevitably wreck the export trades and lead to a vast increase 
in unemployment, but in vain, and the Bank of England 
commenced its policy of reducing the amount of money 

in order to force up its value The sacrifices the Nation 

made to restore the Gold Standard, the bitter years of 
deflation, the millions of unemployed, the ruin of the 
cotton and coal export were all in vain, and the edifice so 
laboriously constructed at such a cost of human suffering 
finally collapsed in 193 1. . * . Any individual may call at 
Somerset House and . . . inspect the shareholders' register of 
any public company. . . . But he is not allowed to inspect 
the list of shareholders of the Bank of England, if indeed 
a list is kept at Somerset House. Moreover, a member of 
Parliament is entitled to put down questions on the Order 
Paper of the House of Commons on almost every conceiv- 
able subject, but he is not allowed to put down any questions 
asking for information as to the names of the shareholders 
of the Bank of England." 

1 In the Introduction to An Agricultural Testament .{Oxford University 
Press), Sir Albert Howard ends his outline of the decay of the Roman 
Empire with the words : 

" The strongest possible support of capital must always be a pros- 
perous and contented country-side. A working compromise between 
agriculture and finance should, therefore, have been evolved. Failure 
to achieve this naturally ended in the ruin of both." 

2 Cf. the note on Democracy on pp. 99-100 of The Rulers of Russia. 



INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 



Adco Method (Rothamsted Experi- 
mental Station, England), 94. 

Addison, Rt. Hon. Lord, 41. 

Africa, 90. 

Agricultural Testament, An (Sir 
Albert Howard), vi, 46, 47, 93, 

95. i°°- 

All These Things (A. N. Field), 81. 

Alternative to Death (Earl of Ports- 
mouth), v, vi, 45, 57. 

American Civil War, 42. 

American War of Independence, 59. 

Anne, Queen, 43. 

Annesley, Lady Clare, 6. 

Anthroposophia Magica (Thomas 
Vaughan), 93. 

Anthroposophical Society, 93. 

Anthroposophy, 94. 

Arch-Enemy of Economic Freedom, 
The (Prof. Soddy), 60, 73- 

Argentine, 17, 33. 

Arnold, Thurman W., 96. 

Australia, 45, 46. 

Bachelor, C. D,, 90. 

Back to Better Grass (I. G. Lewis), 

89. 
Baker, C. Alma, C.B.E., 41.* 
Baldwin, Mr., 13. 
Bank for International Settlements, 

Bank of England, 61, 62, 77, 100. 

Bankers' Conspiracy, The (A. Kit- 
son), 28, 34. 

Bankers' Magazine, The, 34. 

Banking and Currency Committee 
of U.S.A. Senate, 61. 

Banking Commission 1926 (Irish), 

72- 
Banknotes and Currency Act, 20. 
Barlow, K. E., 47, 89. 
Barrier to Health (Douglas Boyd), 

81. 
Basel (Switzerland), 93. 
Basle, 71. 

Belloc, Hilaire, 15. 43- 
Benedict XIV, Pope, 52. 
Besant, Mrs., 93. 
Beveridge Report, 80, 82, 83. 
Billington, F. H., 94. 
Bing, Mrs. Gladys, 5. 
Bio-dynamic system of Steiner, 94. 
Bisschop, W. R., 16. 

10 



Blunden, Edmund, 47. 

Borkin, Joseph, 96. 

Bosanquet, Mr., 16. 

Boyd, Dr. Douglas, 81. 

Brazil, 38. 

Brazil, National Coffee Council of, 

37- 
Bread in Peace and in War (Food 

Education Society of England), 

47. 48, 49- 
Bread of Britain, The (Mr. Hurst), 

49- 
Britain's Problem {G. B. Knowles), 5. 

British Broadcasting Corporation, 

So- 
British Medical Association, 82. 

Browne, W. J., 6. 

Bums, John, 50. 

Butler, R. A., 82. 83. 

Cambridge, 50. 

Catholic Herald, The (London), 38. 

Catholic Times, The, 82. 

Catholic View of the Beveridge Plan, 

A (Rev. L. Watt, S.J.), 80. 
Cecil, Robert, 99. 
Cecil, William, 98. 
Central Bank, 56, 85. 
Chamberlain, Austen, 28. 
Charles I, King of England, 98, 99. 
Charles II, King of England, 99. 
Chaucer (G. K. Chesterton), 39. 
Chesterton, A. K., 79, 8a. 
Chesterton, G. K., 39. 
Chicago Wheat Pit, 37- 
Churchill, Winston, Rt. Hon., 12, 

I7» 28, 39» 30- 
Clarke, W. D., 5. 
Clendining, C. H., s- 
Clergy Review, 52. 
Cleveland, President, 26. 
Clyde, 38. 
Coe, Arthur, 6. 
Comment, in Ethic. (St. Thomas), 

9» 10- 
Compost for Garden Plot or Thou- 
sand- Acre Farm (F. H . Billington), 

94- 95- 
Compost Gardener, The (F. C. King}, 

87, 88. 89. 93. 95- 
Coogan, G. M„ 17, 25. & fi i» 64, 

65, 67. 
Co-operative Wholesale Society, 49. 



102 



Index of Proper Names 



" Com Laws," 42. 
Crimean War, 42. 
Crowther, Geoffrey, vi, 16, 60, 61. 
CunlifTe Currency Committee Re- 
port, 28, 29. 
Currency Commission (Irish), 58, 73. 

Daily Mail, 37. 

Darien, 39. 

Davidson, R., 80. 

Davies, William, 89, 

Dempsey, S. J., Rev. B., 56. 

Deserted Village, The (Oliver Gold- 
smith), 42, 43. 

Discipline of Peace, The (K. E. 
Barlow), 47, 89. 

Dornach, 93. 

Dublin Opinion, 35. 

Dudley, Fr. Eustace, 78. 

Dutch Quinine Syndicate, 96. 

Echo du Bas St. Laurent, L, 90. 
Economic Effects of the Reformation, 

The (Prof. G. O'Brien), 78. 
Economic Tribulation (V. C. Vickers), 

62, 63. 
Elizabeth, Queen, 98, 99. 
Enclosure Acts, English, 43. 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15- 
England, 17, 31, 32, 38, 80. 
English Farming (Sir John Russell), 

43- 

Essay Concerning Human Under- 
standing (Locke), 77. 

Ethics of Interest, The (Fr. Lewis 
Watt, S.J.), S3- . 

Exchange Equalization Account, 61. 

Facts about the Bank of England, 81. 
Fairy Ring of Commerce (H. Shove), 

42. 43- 

Famine in England (Viscount Lym- 
ington), 51, 89. 

Federal Reserve Bank of United 
States, 12, 13. 

Feeding the Family in War-Time 
(Mrs. Gordon Grant), 88. 

Field, A. N„ 67, 68, 69, 70, 81. 

Finance in the Melting Pot (V. C. 
Vickers), 29. 

Fisher, Irving, 65. 

France, 17. 

Fraud dent Standard, A (A. Kit- 
son), 27, 56. 

George I, King, 43. 
George II, King, 43. 
George III, King, 43. 
Germany's Master Plan (J. Borkin 
and C. A. Welsh), 96, 97. 



Gill, Rev. J. Clifford, 6. 
Gladstone, 12. 
Glasgow, 38. 

Gleeson, J. Desmond, 98, 99. 
Glyn, Thomas, 4. 
Godfrey, Most Rev. William, Apost. 
Delegate to Great Britain, 1, 60 - 
Goldsmith, Oliver, 42, 43. 
Gold Standard, 56, 57, 100. 
Gold Standard (Domestic), 60, 6r~ 
Grant, Mrs. Gordon, 88. 
Great War, 58. 
Green, A. Romney, 5. 
Guenon, Rene, 93, 94. 

Haiti, 36. 
Hansard, 13. 
Hargrave, John, vi, 12. 
Hasbach, Dr. M., 43. 
Hattersley, C. Marshall, 5. 
Henry VIII, King of England. 98 » 
Hill, Wilfrid, 4. 
Hiskett, 17. 

History of the English Agricultural 
Labourer, A (Dr. M. Hasbach), 

43- 
Holland, 17. 
Hollis, Christopher, 12, 13, 26, 29. 

32> 33. 3 6 ' 42, 57. 59- 98, 99- 
House of Commons, 100. 
Howard, Sir Albert, vi, 46, 87, 88, 

92, 93' 95. 100. 
100 per cent. Money (Irving Fisher), 

65, 66. 
Hunza Valley, 46. 
Hurst, Mr., 49. 

India, 47, 96. 

Indore Method of Sir Albert 

Howard, 94. 
Insurance for All and Everything 

(R. Davidson), 80. 
Interest and Usury (Rev. Bernard 

Dempsey, S.J.), 56. 
Ireland, 42, 47, 58, 59, 72. 
Irish Banking Commission, Majority 

Report of, 71. 
Irish Banking Commission, Minority 

Report III of, 70, 71, 72, 73. 
Irish Freedom, 58. 
Irish Rising (1916), 59. 

Jacks, G, V., 41. 

James II, King of England, 99. 

Java, 96. 

Johnston, Thomas, 13. 

Juden und das Wirtschaftsleben, Die 

(Prof. W. Sombart), 78, 79. 
Justice et le Pret a Inte'ret, La 

(Lamarche, O.P.), 53. 



Index of Proper Names 



103 



Kelly. C. I., 82. 

Keynes, Mr., 29. 

Keynes Plan, The, 73. 

Kina Bureau (Amsterdam), 96. 

King, F. C, 87, 88, 89, 93. 95. 

Kingship of Christ and Organised 

Naturalism, The, 59. 
Kirk. Rev. P. T. R., 3. 
Kitson, Arthur, 27, 28, 34, 56. 
Knowles, B. D., 5, 15- 
Kuhn, Loeb and Co., 12. 

Labouring Earth, The (C. A. Baker, 

CJ8.E.). 41. 
Lamarche, O.P., Fr., 52. 
Lambert, Rev. C. H., 6. 
Laurence, Henry S., 5. 
League of Nations (Health Section), 

97- 

Lenin, 65. 

Leo XIII, Pope, 52, 55. 

Ley Farming (Sir R. G. Stapledon 
and W. Davies), 89. 

Liebig. Baron von, 90. 

Life of Goldsmith (Macaulay), 42, 43. 

Light Bearers of Darkness, 94. 

Lindberg, Hon. Charles A., 27. 

Lissoy (Ireland), 43. 

Liverpool, 37. 

Lloyd George, Mr., 28. 

Locke, 77. 

Loftus, P. C, M.P., 100. 

London, 70. 

Look to the Land (Lord North- 
bourne), vi, 44. 

Lymington, Viscount, v, vi, 45, 51* 
89. 

Macaulay. 42, 43. 

MacLaren, Andrew, 6. 

Madero. 36, 

Mark, Jeffrey, vi, 19, 20, 22, 35, 

37. 38. 57- 
Marx, Karl, 63. 
Mary, Queen of Scots, 99. 
Massingham, H. J., 5. 
Maxwell, D. W., 21. 
McCarrison. Brig. Gen. Sir Robert 

47- 
McDonald, Ramsay, 13. 
McKenna. Rt. Hon. Reginald, ix t 

13. 22, 57- 
McLaughlin, O.S.B., Fr., 5*- 
McLaughlin, Rev. P., 4. 
McMillan Committee, The, 13. 
Mexico, 36. 
Mitchell, John, 13. 
Mocatta and Goldsmid, 17. 
Modern Idolatry, The (Jeffrey Mark). 

vi, 19, 20, 22, 37« 57* 



Money (Prof. O'Rahillv). vi. 18, 21 

23. S3. 58, 66, 68, 86. 
Money and National Reconstruction, 

100. 
Money Creators (G. M. Coogan), 

17, 25, 26, 61, 64, 67, 68. 
Montague, and Co., Samuel, 17. 
Monthly Bulletin of the Economic 

Reform Club, 50, 
Morgenthau Plan, The, 73. 
Mystical Body of Christ and the Re- 
organization of Society, The, 10, 

40. 59» 60, 77. 
Mystical Body of Christ in the 

Modern World, The, 59. 

Napier, General, 43. 

National Resurrection (Fr. Eustace 

Dudley), 78. 
Netherlands Indies, 96. 
New York Times, The, 37. 
New Zealand, 68, 69, 70, 81. 
Nicaea. Council of, 76. 
Norfolk Rotation, 43. 
Norman, Montagu, 13. 
Northboume, Lord, vi, 44, 51, 90. 

O'Brien, Prof. George, 78. 
O'Loghlen, P. J., 70. 71, 72, 73. 
O'Rahilly, Prof. Alfred, vi, 18, 21, 

53. 54- 58. 66. 68,. 85, 86. 
Our Daily Bread (Prof. Joseph 

Reilly), 48, 49. 
Our Debt to the Soil (Reginald 

Reynolds). 91. 
Our Peace Crisis (Arthur Rogers), 

51, 8i, 82, 83. 
Outline of Money, An (G. Crow- 

ther), vi, 16, 6i. 
Owen, Frank, 13. 
Owen, Robert L., 61. 

Panic Circular, 26, 27- 

Paterson, William, 15. 

P.E.P. (Political and Economic 

Planning Group), 81. 
Pius XI, Pope, 6, 63, 69, 77- 
Pixley and Abell, 17. 
Political Planners, The, 81- 
Portsmouth, Earl of, v. 45, 51 » 89 
Powell. L.B., 5. 
Principal Cause of Unemployment, 

The (D. W. Maxwell), 21. 
Principles of Political Economy 

(J. S. Mill), 77- 
Professor Skinner alias Montagu 

Norman (J. Hargrave), vi, 12. 
Promise to Pay (R. McNair Wilson), 

v . 23. 25. 34- „ . , ,. 

Public Relations Committee of the 
BM.A. (Belfast), 81. 



104 



Index of Proper Names 



Quadragesimo Anno, 63, 69, 77. 
Quick Return System (Miss M. 
Bruce), 94. 

Ranks, 49. 

Rape of the Earth. The (G. V. 

Jacks and R. O. White), 41. 
Reckett, Maurice, 4. 
Regtmine Principum, De (St. 

Thomas), 8. 
Reichsbank, 65. 
Reilly, Prof. Joseph, 48, 49. 
Rerum Novarum, 52. 
Return to Husbandry (Edmund 

Blunden), 47. 
Reynolds, Reginald, 90. 
Rise of the London Money Market 

(W. R. BiBschop), 16. 
Robinson, I. V., 5. 
Rogers, Arthur, 51, 81. 
RSle of Money, The (Prof. Soddy), 

vi, 24, 61. 
Roman Empire, 76, 80, 83, 100 , 
Roman Law, 86. 
Rome, 90. 

Roosevelt, President, 37. 
Root of All Evil (Sir R. Rowe), vi, 

18, 32, 55- 61, 66, 67. 
Rothschild, and Sons, N. M., 17. 
Rowe, Sir Reginald, vi, 4, 1$, 31, 

53» 54. 55. 61, 66. 
Rulers of Russia, 100. 
Russell, Sir John, 43. 

Sam, President, 36. 

Sardinia, 90. 

Scott, J. Creagh, 4. 

Scrutton, Robert J., 4. 

Seaman, A. G., 5. 

Sharpe and Wilkins, 17. 

Sherman Silver Law, 26, 27 . 

Shorter History of England (H. 
Belloc), 15, 43. 

Shove, Commander Herbert, 
D.S.O., 42, 43. 

Sicily, 90. 

Snoviden, Lord, 13. 

Soddy, Prof. Frederick, vi, 3, 6, 
12. 19. 34. 53. S4» 60, 61, 73, 
74. 76. 

Soil and Sense (Michael Graham). 
89. 

Sombart, Prof. Werner, 78. 

Somerset House, 100. 

Spain, 38, 39. 

Spanish America, 36. 

Spillers, 49. 

Standard (Dublin), vi, 30, 58, 85. 

Stapledon, Sir R. George, 89. 

Statement of Principles for an Inter- 
national Monetary Fund, 75. 

Steiner, Rudolph, 93, 94, 95. 



Stokes, R. R-, 5. 

Studiorum Ducem (St. Thomas as 

Guide of Studies), 6. 
Summa Theologica, 8. 
Sunday Times, 92. 

Tax-bonds or Bondage (John 

Mitchell), 13. 
The Truth about New Zealand 

(A. N. Field), 67, 69. 
Theosophical Society, 93, 94. 
Thiosophisme, Le (Rene 1 Guenon), 

93. 94- 
Thomas Aquinas, St., 6, 7, 8, 9, 

10, 11, 40, 61, 80. 
Thompson, Norman A., 3, 6. 
Times, The, 26, 91. 
Tonnage Act of 1694, 14. 
Tragedy of the Stuarts, The (J. 

Desmond Gleeson), 98, 99. 
Trurman, Harold, 39. 
Turner, Charles, 4. 
Twentieth Century Economic System, 

A, 36. 74- 
Two Nations, The (C. Hollis), 12, 

13. 39. 33. 36, 4». 57. 59. 98. 99- 
Tyranny of Gold (Hiskett). 17. 

United States, 17, 20, 26, 27, 33, 

41, 96. 
U.S.A. Financial Chronicle, 38. 
U.S.A. Monetary Trustees, 67, 68. 
Usury Sub Judice (Clergy Review), 

5»- 

Verdon-Roe, AUiott, 4. 

Vickers, Vincent C, 12, 29, 62, 63. 

Vix Pervenit, 52. 

Wallace, Mr., 37. 

Warburg, Paul, 12. 

Watt, S.J., Fr. Lewis, 53, 80. 

Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt 

(Prof. Soddy), 66. 
Weekly Review, vi, 57, 62, 74, 75, 

79, 82, 90, 91. 
Welsh, Charles A., 96, 97. 
Westmoreland, 87. 
White, R. O., 41. 
White Paper on a National Health 

Service, 81. 
White Paper on Employment 

(English), 82. 
William of Orange, 98, 99. 
Williams, Christopher A. Beckett, 4. 
Williamson, Kenny, 50. 
Wilson, President Woodrow, 12, 36. 
Wilson, R. McNair, vi, 23, 25, 26, 

34- 73- 
Workingmen's Guilds of the Middle 

Ages, The, 58, 77. 

